MRtrix3: A fast, ﬂexible and open software framework for medical image processing and visualisation
===================================================================================================

MRtrix3 is an open-source, cross-platform software package for medical image processing, analysis and visualisation, 
with a particular emphasis on the investigation of the brain using diffusion MRI. It is implemented using a fast, 
modular and ﬂexible general-purpose code framework for image data access and manipulation, enabling efﬁcient 
development of new applications, whilst retaining high computational performance and a consistent command-line 
interface between applications. In this article, we provide a high-level overview of the features of the MRtrix3 
framework and general-purpose image processing applications provided with the software.

1. Introduction

The use of medical imaging technologies such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has rapidly expanded over the last 
decades, sparking the development of dedicated digital image analysis techniques tailored to these often large imaging 
datasets (3 and even higher dimensional) (Dhawan, 2011). These methods include artefact correction, anatomy 
segmentation, quantitative feature extraction, and spatial image registration which allows for comparison of features 
in subjects over time, between (groups of) subjects and across populations. Development of medical image analysis 
techniques is largely driven by the academic research community, and many such packages are now freely available, 
including: FSL (Jenkinson et al., 2012), FreeSurfer (Fischl, 2012), SPM (Ashburner, 2012), AFNI (Cox, 1996), DTI Studio 
(Jiang et al., 2006), DSI Studio (“DSI Studio” 2019), Camino (Cook et al., 2006), ExploreDTI (Leemans et al., 2009), 
MITK (Nolden et al., 2013), ITK (Yoo et al., 2002), ANTs (Avants et al., 2009), MIRTK (“MIRTK” 2019), DiPy 
(Garyfallidis et al., 2014), and many others. Such open software platforms have the potential to enable the translation 
of novel method developments to, e.g., MRI hardware vendors, clinicians and the biomedical research community.

MRtrix3 has been designed as an open-source, modular software

platform for medical image analysis and visualisation. This includes a lightweight framework for application 
development that facilitates efﬁcient image access and manipulation, convenient multi-threading primitives, and 
support for a broad range of image ﬁle formats. End-user applications provided with MRtrix3 include general-purpose 
image conversion and manipulation tools and the visualisation tool MRView tailored to multi-dimensional (3D þ ) medical 
image data. All components are designed with a strong focus on performance and memory efﬁciency, which are essential 
features for dealing with these often very large datasets. Computationally demanding quantitative imaging algorithms 
often require run times on the order of minutes (or hours), which may easily become days (or weeks) if performance is 
not optimised to deal with this speciﬁcally. In addition, MRtrix3 offers support for external modules that can be 
built and distributed independently.

MRtrix3 was historically developed with a particular emphasis on investigating brain white matter using 
diffusion-weighted MRI (dMRI), a medical imaging modality that can act as an indirect probe of neural microstructure, 
by measuring local hindrance of water diffusion (Johansen-Berg and Behrens, 2013; Jones, 2010). It derives from the now 
deprecated MRtrix 0.2.x software package (Tournier et al., 2012), which was itself started circa 2003, when few 
packages existed for the

analysis of diffusion MRI data. It has evolved massively since, both in terms of the underlying codebase, and in terms 
of the scope of the functionality provided. The platform incorporates a number of features tailored to the 
orientational nature of dMRI data within each imaging voxel, such as a representation using spherical harmonics basis 
functions, and a bespoke ﬁle format for 3D streamlines. MRtrix3 also provides a wide range of dMRI analysis methods, 
outlined in the Diffusion analyses section below. Thanks to these features, MRtrix3 has primarily gained support in the 
dMRI community. However, its architecture facilitates image processing in general, and MRtrix3 also offers image 
analysis methods less speciﬁc to dMRI such as image ﬁltering and calculation, statistics, image denoising (Veraart et 
al., 2016) and Gibbs ringing suppression (Kellner et al., 2016), intensity normalisation (Raffelt et al., 2017a) and 
diffeomorphic image registration (Raffelt et al., 2011).

In this paper, we describe the guiding principles underlying the design and implementation of MRtrix3. We outline the 
main aspects of the software architecture, particularly the image access and multithreading primitives, as well as the 
build system and related developer tools. Finally, we showcase the visualisation capabilities in MRView and give a 
brief overview of the currently supported tools for general-purpose image processing and dMRI analysis.

2. Guiding principles

2.1. Reproducible neuroscience

With a growing number of neuroimaging studies and the increasing prevalence of advanced data analysis in radiology 
practice, reproducibility becomes ever more important. Publishing open and reproducible analysis pipelines enables 
neuroscientiﬁc research to replicate pilot results on larger datasets, and also facilitates comparing sensitivity and 
speciﬁcity of various methods. In addition, publicly available software can help the clinical translation of novel 
analysis techniques.

The MRtrix3 collective believes that reproducible neuroscience relies ﬁrst and foremost on open source software. 
Publishing source code, tracking versions, and documenting improvements and bug ﬁxes, is vital to ensure full 
transparency on what was done in a study. We are therefore fully committed to keeping MRtrix3 open source and tracking 
the version history using Git. The software is published under the terms of the open source Mozilla Public Licence 2.0, 
1 which permits third-party modiﬁcation, distribution and commercial use as long as the source code is disclosed 
(although individual commands may be published under different copyright licences as required by the original authors). 
Furthermore, MRtrix3 also incorporates continuous integration testing to detect and avoid adverse effects of code 
changes between versions.

In addition, MRtrix3 provides the requisite functionalities for handling data in the Brain Imaging Data Structure 
(BIDS), 2 a recently proposed standard for organising and sharing neuroimaging data (Gorgolewski et al., 2016). These 
include importing and exporting dMRI gradient encoding and other metadata in JSON and FSL bvecs / bvals format, 
ultimately enabling integrating MRtrix3 commands in BIDS Apps (Gorgolewski et al., 2017).

Finally, MRtrix3 also offers automatic history tracking in the output ﬁle header, archiving the pipeline of operations 
used to generate each output image, as well as the exact version tag of each invoked command.

User documentation is available in the inline help page of each command and also on a dedicated documentation website 3 
that includes additional background information, tutorials and pipelines. The documentation is kept up to date with the 
current release and can be retrieved for older versions. Major updates and new software releases are also announced on 
the main website and blog.4 

Another key beneﬁt to open development is the interaction between users and developers as one community. To foster 
these interactions MRtrix3 provides an online forum, 5 where a growing number of users post questions, receive support, 
and have scientiﬁc discussions. Furthermore, users and developers can report and track technical issues through 
Github, 6 and suggest new features for future releases. Github is also the platform where both internal and external 
developer contributions are discussed and managed.

3. Design aspects

MRtrix3 has been designed from the outset to facilitate the development of high-performance applications concerned with 
the processing and analysis of medical image datasets, and to offer a consistent and simple command-line interface. It 
focuses primarily on command-line applications to provide a wide range of functionalities that can be combined and 
scripted to form complex automated workﬂows. It relies on modern standards and technologies, particularly C þþ 11 7 
and OpenGL8  3.3, yet strives to limit the number of external dependencies to a small and well-supported set, available 
across a broad range of platforms; currently these include Python 9 (for building the software and using scripts), zlib 
10 (for access to compressed images), Eigen 3 11 (for high-performance linear algebra support), and Qt 12 (version 4 or 
5, for graphical user interface support). All of these dependencies are available across a wide range of platforms, 
allowing MRtrix3 to run natively on most ﬂavours of Unix, including GNU/Linux and macOS as well as a range of 
high-performance computing (HPC) environments, and Microsoft Windows via the MSYS2 13 project or Windows Subsystem for 
Linux (WSL).14 

Most of the functionality is written using C þþ templates, providing high runtime performance by allowing the compiler 
to optimise away any redundant overhead. Motivated by a heavy focus on multidimensional image access, simple yet 
powerful constructs for multi-threaded operations are provided. The framework provides native access to and seamless 
interaction between a range of image ﬁle formats commonly used in the medical imaging community, including native 
support for DICOM 15 (read-only), Analyze, 16 NIfTI1, 17 NIfTI2, 18 MGH, 19 and MRtrix3’s own dedicated image formats20 
, as well as compressed

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

https://mrtrix.readthedocs.io.

http://www.mrtrix.org.

http://community.mrtrix.org.

https://github.com/mrtrix3. http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/standards. https://www.opengl.org/.

https://www.python.org/.

https://zlib.net/.

http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/.

https://www.qt.io/.

https://www.msys2.org/. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about. https://www.dicomstandard.org/. 
https://rportal.mayo.edu/bir/ANALYZE75.pdf. https://nifti.nimh.nih.gov/nifti-1/.

18

https://nifti.nimh.nih.gov/nifti-2/. https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/FsTutorial/MghFormat. 
https://mrtrix.readthedocs.io/en/3.0_rc3/getting_started/image_data.htm l#mrtrix-image-formats-mih-mif.

versions thereof.

MRtrix introduces a few additional ﬁle formats to handle various types of data, notably image data, and streamlines 
data. These MRtrixspeciﬁc formats were designed to address limitations in the formats available at the time and 
provide additional beneﬁts including:

● Ability to store arbitrary key-value entries in the header, which enables storage of diffusion gradient and phase 
encoding schemes or any other metadata deemed of interest, avoiding a potential source of error due to mixing data 
stored across multiple ﬁles (e.g. bvecs/bvals ﬁles);

● Tracking of the command history;

● Ability to store data with arbitrary strides (discussed below and in Appendix A);

● Streamlines data stored in scanner space, removing any dependencies on external reference images.

We note that the beneﬁts listed above are still relevant today, and for this reason, we still advocate the use of 
these formats to our users. Both formats are documented with reference MATLAB 21 code available for use. MRtrix3 also 
provides the tckconvert conversion tool to import & export streamlines data between formats.

While most MRtrix3 commands consist of compiled binary executables, some are written in Python, and typically invoke 
other MRtrix3 executables to perform more complex tasks. Moreover, a number of scripts invoke commands from 3rd party 
software packages such as FSL (Jenkinson et al., 2012) or ANTs (Avants et al., 2009), providing convenience wrappers to 
perform specialised tasks (see the Image Processing tools and analyses section below for details).

3.1. Image access

Functionality for image input/output is provided by the core MRtrix3 library, so that all MRtrix3 applications can read 
and write all supported image formats directly: there is no requirement to convert the data to and from speciﬁc image 
formats. All MRtrix3 applications consistently use the same coordinate system, which is identical to the scanner 
reference frame in the NIfTI standard. MRtrix3 handles coordinates consistently across ﬁle formats and in addition, 
the native MRtrix3 image format allows automated handling and storage of coordinate system dependent information such 
as the dMRI gradient table in the image header to ensure this information remains consistent throughout the analysis 
pipeline.

We do however note that while MRtrix3 supports these formats, there can still be issues regarding interoperability 
between software packages, relating primarily to the conventions assumed regarding the interpretation of the 
information stored, for example: orientations, tensor components, spherical harmonics coefﬁcients, and other types of 
information (e.g. what coordinate system is assumed when storing eigenvectors, etc.). Until common standards are agreed 
by the community, users will need to handle any issues arising from these differences manually.

3.1.1. Optimised data access Access to image data is automatically optimised using a variety of techniques to ensure 
near-optimal performance across a range of operating conditions. The various strategies employed are outlined in this 
section.

By default, image access is achieved via memory-mapping with on-the-ﬂy data type conversion. However, when the stored 
data type matches the data type requested by the application, MRtrix3 commands will automatically use “direct IO” 
access, where data are accessed as a native array in memory, thus avoiding the overhead of the function calls

otherwise necessary for the conversion. When desired, applications can also explicitly request “direct IO” access to 
the data (e.g. as shown in Fig. 1): this is particularly beneﬁcial for applications that will access image data 
repeatedly, for example, multi-pass algorithms, patch-based operations, interpolation, etc. To achieve this, the data 
are loaded directly into RAM in the desired data type, unless they are already stored as such (in which case 
memory-mapping already provides “direct IO” access). Furthermore, while image writing is also typically done using 
memory mapping, there are cases where doing so incurs a loss of performance. This is particularly relevant when 
operating on networked ﬁle systems where random writes to memory-mapped regions can result in heavy network usage. In 
this case, MRtrix3 uses an alternative delayed write-back strategy, with the backend holding the data in RAM and 
automatically committing the data to storage when the image is closed.

MRtrix3 also has a ﬂexible concept of strides, allowing the multidimensional image data to be stored in RAM (or ﬁle 
when the image format supports it) in any reasonable order (see Appendix A for details). It is for example entirely 
possible to have the data stored in a volume-contiguous manner (for 4D ﬁles), meaning that the data for all volumes of 
a given imaging voxel are co-located in RAM (see Fig. A1). This allows for efﬁcient access and maximises CPU cache 
reuse, in some cases improving performance considerably. Developers can specify these strides when accessing images 
with a particular purpose in mind (e.g., voxel-wise processing of 4D ﬁles), and the MRtrix3 backend will load and 
re-order the image data in RAM if necessary, but still use “direct IO” access via memory-mapping where possible to 
avoid needless data copies. Images can be stored in any stride ordering supported by the chosen ﬁle format. Of the 
supported formats, only MRtrix3’s own formats support arbitrary stride ordering, a feature that offers distinct 
performance advantages when processing different types of data, particularly by allowing volume-contiguous storage.

3.1.2. DICOM handling MRtrix3 includes its own fast DICOM import handling, allowing all MRtrix3 applications to 
seamlessly support DICOM images as input. The DICOM import code handles data stored using the recent DICOM multiframe 
standard, as well as the standard multi-ﬁle storage, including Siemens mosaics. If present, it will also extract the 
diffusion MRI encoding information for 3 major vendors (Siemens, GE, Philips), and make it available to the application 
as part of the image header. Other types of information are also extracted if found, including the EPI phase encoding 
direction and slice timings.

DICOM images can be provided as a single .dcm ﬁle, or more commonly, as a folder containing the multiple DICOM ﬁles 
that make up the full DICOM series. The import code will scan through all ﬁles in the folder, recursing into any 
subfolders encountered, and collate all the information into a hierarchy by patient/study/series/images. If the folder 
contains a single DICOM series, the data are loaded as a single dataset directly with no further interaction required; 
otherwise, the user will be presented with a listing of the contents and required to select the desired series.

3.2. Performance and piping

3.2.1. Unix pipes MRtrix3 allows temporary images to be created in RAM for use as scratch buffers within applications 
and also passed between applications via Unix pipes. This allows the software to be used in ﬂexible, powerful 
combinations, for example:

Rather than passing the full image data through the pipe, temporary images are created to hold the data, and only the 
ﬁlename is passed through the pipe. This helps to ensure optimal performance since the data can be accessed via 
memory-mapping at both ends of the pipe, eliminating any needless data copies, and keeping RAM usage to a minimum.

3.2.2. Multi-threading Multi-threading is a type of computer execution technique supported by modern hardware that 
allows a program to run across multiple threads of execution concurrently. Each thread executes independently while 
sharing its resources and coordinating with the other threads in the process. In MRtrix3, almost all commands have been 
multi-threaded, by default running with the maximum utilization of CPU processors to achieve high computing 
performance.

In MRtrix3, multi-threaded processing is principally achieved through the use of one of two Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs):

1. Image processing: When subsets (e.g. voxels, slices, volumes) of an image (or set of images) can be processed 
independently, the ThreadedLoop construct performs a multi-threaded traversal of the image(s), with the only requisite 
that the programmer deﬁne the function to be executed for each image location; this is shown in Fig. 2 and utilised in 
Appendix B. Concurrent threads will typically process adjacent rows of data; this is done to ensure optimal performance 
by maximising cache reuse, minimising disk seek latency, and maintaining a sufﬁciently ﬁne level of granularity to 
avoid idle CPU cores. By default, the order of traversal of the image axes is set by the strides

of the image, although this can be speciﬁed explicitly by the developer if desired. Moreover, the developer can 
control which images are to be looped over simultaneously, which axes to iterate over, and of these, which are to be 
processed within each thread (a single row by default). 2. General processing: For tasks not native to an image grid, 
the more general run_queue () construct enables multi-threaded processing through the use of data queue structures; an 
example of this is shown in Fig. 3. Classes deﬁned by the programmer read and/or write data from these queues via 
functors, with the requisite mutual exclusion locking between threads handled by the back-end of the API. The type(s) 
of data passed between these threads are also templated and therefore entirely under programmer control. For smaller 
data/processing tasks, instances of these data can be aggregated in batches so as to mitigate the overhead of 
inter-thread communication.

3.2.3. Use in high-performance computing environments MRtrix3 can run in HPC environments: it can be installed either 
system-wide by system administrators, or into individual user accounts by users themselves, and provides control over 
aspects such as the number of threads and temporary ﬁle locations at the system-wide, userspeciﬁc and 
command-speciﬁc level. To ease installation on older HPC systems with an outdated compiler or other dependencies, 
MRtrix3 provides the option to compile static builds that can be produced on a separate, up to date workstation, and 
transferred across to HPC once compiled.

While support for virtualization via containers is outside the scope of

the MRtrix3 project, there are a number of external projects providing precisely this kind of functionality, for 
instance, the MRtrix3_connectome BIDS application. 22 Docker 23 and Singularity 24 containers are also

available.

One outstanding issue with the use of MRtrix3 in HPC or cloud environments is the lack of reliable remote display 
capability. This is due to MRtrix3 using the OpenGL 3.3 speciﬁcation, which is currently not (or at best poorly) 
supported for X11 remote rendering. At time of writing there are no simple solutions for this limitation.

3.3. Developer tools

MRtrix3 is developed using modern software practices with transparency in mind. Software version control is managed 
using Git, hosted openly on Github. 25 Issues are tracked and discussed publicly on GitHub. 26 Most MRtrix3 commands 
have tests to ensure the output remains consistent with expectations throughout the development cycle. Test data are 
hosted on a separate Git repository 27 to keep the main source code repository small and lightweight. Continuous 
integration testing is managed by TravisCI 28 (for Linux and macOS) and AppVeyor29  (for Microsoft Windows).

MRtrix3 is designed to minimise the amount of effort required to develop complete image processing applications, as 
illustrated in Figs. 1–3. Developers have access to a range of classes for seamless access to images and other types of 
data, facilities for multi-threading operations over images and for parallel processing of streams of data, image 
ﬁlters and other convenience methods. The core API documentation is available online30 , and is generated directly 
from the code using Doxygen.31 

The development tools and build system are demonstrated in Appendix B (other examples are available in the developer 
documentation32 ). The example binary command in B.1 also illustrates the image access and multi-threading primitives 
provided in the MRtrix3 libraries.

3.3.1. Integrated command-line interface and documentation MRtrix3 provides a framework for simultaneously documenting, 
specifying and retrieving command-line arguments and options, all centralised within a single function for each 
application. This includes authorship and copyright information, a general description of the command and speciﬁc 
descriptions of the arguments and options, and any relevant references. This information is used to generate the 
application’s online help page, and at runtime to display its help page, to automatically check the validity of the 
arguments, and to retrieve these arguments and options at any point in the code. See the code example in Appendix B for 
an illustration of this framework.

3.3.2. Build system The software includes a bespoke system to manage conﬁguring and building the software. It is 
comprised of two Python scripts: ’conﬁgure’ and ’build’. The former detects various aspects of the operating 
environment (OS, availability of C þþ 11 compliant compiler and required libraries, etc). The build script scans the 
code to build a full dependency tree based on simple rules about ﬁle location and naming conventions, identiﬁes 
outdated targets, assembles a list of tasks required to bring the targets up to date, and then launches the relevant 
commands in the right order and in parallel for fast build times. This allows the code to be modiﬁed without requiring 
any other changes (for example, to external Makeﬁles): a new command can simply be dropped into the right folder, and 
its corresponding binary will be compiled the next time build is invoked.

3.3.3. External contributions MRtrix3 encourages users to contribute their own methods to the software and recognises 
their need to distribute these however they see ﬁt. Therefore, the MRtrix3 build system provides a convenient 
primitive

25

https://github.com/MRtrix3/mrtrix3/. https://github.com/MRtrix3/mrtrix3/issues. https://github.com/MRtrix3/test_data 
https://travis-ci.org/MRtrix3/mrtrix3. https://ci.appveyor.com/project/MRtrix3/mrtrix3. 
http://www.mrtrix.org/developer-documentation/. http://www.doxygen.org/. 
http://www.mrtrix.org/developer-documentation/examples.html.

for external modules that enables developers to build their own applications, linked to the core MRtrix3 library and 
leveraging its image access and multi-threading primitives. These external modules can be distributed separately under 
any open source license or may be integrated into a future MRtrix3 release. In either case, developers are given full 
credit for their work through embedding of author information, references, and copyright statement, within the code and 
resulting command help page and documentation.

3.3.4. Python scripts While piping of images (as described in Unix pipes (section 3.2.1)) can be used to chain several 
MRtrix3 commands into composite applications, MRtrix3 also contains a dedicated Python scripting library to aid the 
development of more complex applications and processing pipelines involving multiple MRtrix3 (or other) commands. In 
contrast to projects such as DiPy (Garyfallidis et al., 2014), this library does not provide functionality to 
manipulate raw image data within Python itself, but provides functionality to invoke and manage external 
high-performance executables to perform the actual computations. Features of the scripting library include: standard 
command-line options; help page formatting and documentation generation consistent with MRtrix3 binary commands; 
scratch directory management; and the ability to continue from any point in a previous execution for long or 
computationally demanding pipelines. The application module and library functions on which these scripts are built are 
additionally designed to be both accessible and functional for researchers looking to construct their own processing 
pipelines from existing commands and to interface with external tools, with features described in “3.3.3 External 
contributions” applicable to such scripts just as for C þþ binaries. An example of such a script is provided in 
Appendix B.

4. MRView

The MRtrix3 viewer, MRView, was written to be cross-platform, high performance, convenient to use, and extensible. To 
meet these aims, MRView uses the high-performance industry-standard OpenGL 33 3.3 API to leverage the graphics 
capabilities of modern systems, and the widely supported and open-source Qt toolkit 34 to manage the interface elements 
(widgets). It is also designed from the outset for interactive use from the command-line. This allows users to rapidly 
experiment with new ideas, develop and debug pipelines, and inspect the output of processing commands. Two aspects of 
its design play a role in supporting this: ﬁrst, MRView accepts input from Unix pipes (as illustrated in the example 
in section 3.2.1); and second, it is quick to launch and display (through a number of design decisions, including the 
use of memory-mapping for “lazy loading” and delayed initialisation of interface elements until the point of use). See 
the MRtrix3 website for demonstration videos.35 

An important aspect of MRView is its ability to load multiple images concurrently, allowing fast switching between them 
via the menu or the PageUp/PageDown keys. In combination with the optimisations mentioned above, this allows 
interactive use in otherwise demanding workﬂows, such as loading a long list of images into the viewer concurrently 
and inspecting them with interactive framerates, even when the data are held on network ﬁle shares. This type of 
action is useful to quickly scan through the results of a processing step over all participants in a large study (to 
check the quality of the image masks, for example).

MRView is also capable of displaying slice-wise information at arbitrary oblique cuts through the data. This is 
particularly useful to

33

34

35

https://www.opengl.org/. https://www.qt.io/. http://www.mrtrix.org/videos.


