CHAPTER 1 Getting Started
=========================

**1.0 Introduction**

The Arduino environment has been designed to be easy to use for beginners who have
no software or electronics experience. With Arduino, you can build objects that can
respond to and/or control light, sound, touch, and movement. Arduino has been used
to create an amazing variety of things, including musical instruments, robots, light
sculptures, games, interactive furniture, and even interactive clothing.

If you’re not a beginner, please feel free to skip ahead to recipes that
interest you.

Arduino is used in many educational programs around the world, particularly by de-
signers and artists who want to easily create prototypes but do not need a deep under-
standing of the technical details behind their creations. Because it is designed to be used
by nontechnical people, the software includes plenty of example code to demonstrate
how to use the Arduino board’s various facilities.

Though it is easy to use, Arduino’s underlying hardware works at the same level of
sophistication that engineers employ to build embedded devices. People already work-
ing with microcontrollers are also attracted to Arduino because of its agile development
capabilities and its facility for quick implementation of ideas.

Arduino is best known for its hardware, but you also need software to program that
hardware. Both the hardware and the software are called “Arduino.” The combination
enables you to create projects that sense and control the physical world. The software
is free, open source, and cross-platform. The boards are inexpensive to buy, or you can
build your own (the hardware designs are also open source). In addition, there is an
active and supportive Arduino community that is accessible worldwide through the
Arduino forums and the wiki (known as the Arduino Playground). The forums and the
wiki offer project development examples and solutions to problems that can provide
inspiration and assistance as you pursue your own projects.

The recipes in this chapter will get you started by explaining how to set up the devel-
opment environment and how to compile and run an example sketch.

Source code containing computer instructions for controlling Arduino
functionality is usually referred to as a sketch in the Arduino community.
The word sketch will be used throughout this book to refer to Arduino
program code.

The Blink sketch, which comes with Arduino, is used as an example for recipes in this
chapter, though the last recipe in the chapter goes further by adding sound and col-
lecting input through some additional hardware, not just blinking the light built into
the board. Chapter 2 covers how to structure a sketch for Arduino and provides an
introduction to programming.

If you already know your way around Arduino basics, feel free to jump
forward to later chapters. If you’re a first-time Arduino user, patience
in these early recipes will pay off with smoother results later.

**Arduino Software**

Software programs, called sketches, are created on a computer using the Arduino inte-
grated development environment (IDE). The IDE enables you to write and edit code
and convert this code into instructions that Arduino hardware understands. The IDE
also transfers those instructions to the Arduino board (a process called uploading).

**Arduino Hardware**

The Arduino board is where the code you write is executed. The board can only control
and respond to electricity, so specific components are attached to it to enable it to
interact with the real world. These components can be sensors, which convert some
aspect of the physical world to electricity so that the board can sense it, or actuators,
which get electricity from the board and convert it into something that changes the
world. Examples of sensors include switches, accelerometers, and ultrasound distance
sensors. Actuators are things like lights and LEDs, speakers, motors, and displays.

There are a variety of official boards that you can use with Arduino software and a wide
range of Arduino-compatible boards produced by members of the community.

The most popular boards contain a USB connector that is used to provide power and
connectivity for uploading your software onto the board. Figure 1-1 shows a basic board
that most people start with, the Arduino Uno.

The Arduino Uno has a second microcontroller onboard to handle all USB communi-
cation; the small surface-mount chip (the ATmega8U2) is located near the USB socket
on the board. This can be programmed separately to enable the board to appear as
different USB devices (see Recipe 18.14 for an example). The Arduino Leonardo board
replaces the ATmega8U2 and the ATmega328 controllers with a single ATmega32u4
chip that implements the USB protocol in software. The Arduino-compatible Teensy
and Teensy+ boards from PJRC (http://www.pjrc.com/teensy/) are also capable of em-
ulating USB devices. Older boards, and most of the Arduino-compatible boards, use a
chip from the FTDI company that provides a hardware USB solution for connection to
the serial port of your computer.

You can get boards as small as a postage stamp, such as the Arduino Mini and Pro Mini;
larger boards that have more connection options and more powerful processors, such
as the Arduino Mega; and boards tailored for specific applications, such as the LilyPad
for wearable applications, the Fio for wireless projects, and the Arduino Pro for em-
bedded applications (standalone projects that are often battery-operated).

Recent additions to the range include the Arduino ADK, which has a USB host socket
on it and is compatible with the Android Open Accessory Development Kit, the offi-
cially approved method of attaching hardware to Android devices. The Leonardo board
uses a controller chip (the ATmega32u4) that is able to present itself as various HID
devices. The Ethernet board includes Ethernet connectivity, and has a Power Over
Ethernet option, so it is possible to use a single cable to connect and power the board.

Other Arduino-compatible boards are also available, including the following:

• Arduino Nano, a tiny board with USB capability, from Gravitech (http://store.grav
itech.us/arna30wiatn.html)

• Bare Bones Board, a low-cost board available with or without USB capability, from
Modern Device (http://www.moderndevice.com/products/bbb-kit)

• Boarduino, a low-cost breadboard-compatible board, from Adafruit Industries
(http://www.adafruit.com/)

• Seeeduino, a flexible variation of the standard USB board, from Seeed Studio
Bazaar (http://www.seeedstudio.com/)

• Teensy and Teensy++, tiny but extremely versatile boards, from PJRC (http://www
.pjrc.com/teensy/)

A list of Arduino-compatible boards is available at http://www.freeduino.org/.

**See Also**

An overview of Arduino boards: http://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/Hardware.

Online guides for getting started with Arduino are available at http://arduino.cc/en/
Guide/Windows for Windows, http://arduino.cc/en/Guide/MacOSX for Mac OS X, and
http://www.arduino.cc/playground/Learning/Linux for Linux.

A list of over a hundred boards that can be used with the Arduino development envi-
ronment can be found at: http://jmsarduino.blogspot.com/2009/03/comprehensive-ardu
ino-compatible.html

**1.1 Installing the Integrated Development Environment (IDE)**

**Problem**

You want to install the Arduino development environment on your computer.

**Solution**

The Arduino software for Windows, Mac, and Linux can be downloaded from http://
arduino.cc/en/Main/Software.

The Windows download is a ZIP file. Unzip the file to any convenient directory—
Program Files/Arduino is a sensible place.

A free utility for unzipping files, called 7-Zip, can be downloaded from
http://www.7-zip.org/.

Unzipping the file will create a folder named Arduino-00<nn> (where <nn> is the ver-
sion number of the Arduino release you downloaded). The directory contains the
executable file (named Arduino.exe), along with various other files and folders. Double-
click the Arduino.exe file and the splash screen should appear (see Figure 1-2), followed
by the main program window (see Figure 1-3). Be patient, as it can take some time for
the software to load.

Figure 1-2. Arduino splash screen (Version 1.0 in Windows 7)

The Arduino download for the Mac is a disk image (.dmg); double-click the file when
the download is complete. The image will mount (it will appear like a memory stick
on the desktop). Inside the disk image is the Arduino application. Copy this to
somewhere convenient—the Applications folder is a sensible place. Double-click the
application once you have copied it over (it is not a good idea to run it from the disk
image). The splash screen will appear, followed by the main program window.

Linux installation varies depending on the Linux distribution you are using. See the
Arduino wiki for information (http://www.arduino.cc/playground/Learning/Linux).

To enable the Arduino development environment to communicate with the board, you
need to install drivers.

On Windows, use the USB cable to connect your PC and the Arduino board and wait
for the Found New Hardware Wizard to appear. If you are using an Uno board, let the
wizard attempt to find and install drivers. It will fail to do this (don’t worry, this is the
expected behavior). To fix it you now need to go to Start Menu→Control Panel→System
and Security. Click on System, and then open Device Manager. In the listing that is
displayed find the entry in COM and LPT named Arduino UNO (COM nn). nn will be the
number Windows has assigned to the port created for the board. You will see a warning
logo next to this because the appropriate drivers have not yet been assigned. Right click
on the entry and select Update Driver Software. Choose the “Browse my computer for
driver software” option, and navigate to the Drivers folder inside the Arduino folder
you just unzipped. Select the ArduinoUNO.inf file and windows should then complete
the installation process.

If you are using an earlier board (any board that uses FTDI drivers) with Windows Vista
or Windows 7 and are online, you can let the wizard search for drivers and they will
install automatically. On Windows XP (or if you don’t have Internet access), you should
specify the location of the drivers. Use the file selector to navigate to the FTDI USB
Drivers directory, located in the directory where you unzipped the Arduino files. When
this driver has installed, the Found New Hardware Wizard will appear again, saying a
new serial port has been found. Follow the same process as before.

It is important that you go through the sequence of steps to install the
drivers two times, or the software will not be able to communicate with
the board.

On the Mac, the latest Arduino boards, such as the Uno, can be used without additional
drivers. When you first plug the board in a notification will pop up saying a new net-
work port has been found, you can dismiss this. If you are using earlier boards (boards
that need FTDI drivers), you will need to install driver software. There is a package
named FTDIUSBSerialDriver, with a range of numbers after it, inside the disk image.
Double-click this and the installer will take you through the process. You will need to
know an administrator password to complete the process.

On Linux, most distributions have the driver already installed, but follow the Linux
link given in this chapter’s introduction for specific information for your distribution.

**Discussion**

If the software fails to start, check the troubleshooting section of the Arduino website,
http://arduino.cc/en/Guide/Troubleshooting, for help solving installation problems.

**See Also**

Online guides for getting started with Arduino are available at http://arduino.cc/en/
Guide/Windows for Windows, http://arduino.cc/en/Guide/MacOSX for Mac OS X, and
http://www.arduino.cc/playground/Learning/Linux for Linux.


**1.2 Setting Up the Arduino Board**

**Problem**

You want to power up a new board and verify that it is working.

**Solution**

Plug the board in to a USB port on your computer and check that the green LED power
indicator on the board illuminates. Standard Arduino boards (Uno, Duemilanove, and
Mega) have a green LED power indicator located near the reset switch.

An orange LED near the center of the board (labeled “Pin 13 LED” in Figure 1-4) should
flash on and off when the board is powered up (boards come from the factory preloaded
with software to flash the LED as a simple check that the board is working).

Figure 1-4. Basic Arduino board (Duemilanove and Uno)

New boards such as Leonardo have the LEDs located near the USB connector; see
Figure 1-5. Recent boards have duplicate pins for use with I2C (marked SCL and SDA).
These boards also have a pin marked IOREF that can be used to determine the operating
voltage of the chip.

The latest boards have three additional connections in the new standard
for connector layout on the board. This does not affect the use of older
shields (they will all continue to work with the new boards, just as they
did with earlier boards). The new connections provide a pin (IOREF)
for shields to detect the analog reference voltage (so that analog input
values can be calibrated to the supply voltage), SCL and SDA pins to
enable a consistent connection for I2C devices (the location of the I2C
pins has differed on previous boards due to different chip configura-
tions). Shields designed for the new layout should work on any board
that uses the new pin locations. An additional pin (next to the IOREF
pin) is not being used at the moment, but enables new functionality to
be implemented in the future without needing to change the pin layout
again.

**Discussion**

If the power LED does not illuminate when the board is connected to your computer,
the board is probably not receiving power.

The flashing LED (connected to digital output pin 13) is being controlled by code
running on the board (new boards are preloaded with the Blink example sketch). If the
pin 13 LED is flashing, the sketch is running correctly, which means the chip on the
board is working. If the green power LED is on but the pin 13 LED is not flashing, it
could be that the factory code is not on the chip; follow the instructions in Rec-
ipe 1.3 to load the Blink sketch onto the board to verify that the board is working. If
you are not using a standard board, it may not have a built-in LED on pin 13, so check
the documentation for details of your board. The Leonardo board fades the LED up
and down (it looks like the LED is “breathing”) to show that the board is working.

**See Also**

Online guides for getting started with Arduino are available at http://arduino.cc/en/
Guide/Windows for Windows, http://arduino.cc/en/Guide/MacOSX for Mac OS X, and
http://www.arduino.cc/playground/Learning/Linux for Linux.
A troubleshooting guide can be found at http://arduino.cc/en/Guide/Troubleshooting.

**1.3 Using the Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to Prepare an Arduino Sketch**

**Problem**

You want to get a sketch and prepare it for uploading to the board.

**Solution**

Use the Arduino IDE to create, open, and modify sketches that define what the board
will do. You can use buttons along the top of the IDE to perform these actions (shown
in Figure 1-6), or you can use the menus or keyboard shortcuts (shown in Figure 1-7).

The Sketch Editor area is where you view and edit code for a sketch. It supports com-
mon text-editing keys such as Ctrl-F (⌘+F on a Mac) for find, Ctrl-Z (⌘+Z on a Mac)
for undo, Ctrl-C (⌘+C on a Mac) to copy highlighted text, and Ctrl-V (⌘+V on a Mac)
to paste highlighted text.

Figure 1-7 shows how to load the Blink sketch (the sketch that comes preloaded on a
new Arduino board).

After you’ve started the IDE, go to the File→Examples menu and select 1. Basics→Blink,
as shown in Figure 1-7. The code for blinking the built-in LED will be displayed in the
Sketch Editor window (refer to Figure 1-6).

Before the code can be sent to the board, it needs to be converted into instructions that
can be read and executed by the Arduino controller chip; this is called compiling. To
do this, click the compile button (the top-left button with a tick inside), or select
Sketch→Verify/Compile (Ctrl-R; ⌘+R on a Mac).

You should see a message that reads “Compiling sketch...” and a progress bar in the
message area below the text-editing window. After a second or two, a message that
reads “Done Compiling” will appear. The black console area will contain the following
additional message:

Binary sketch size: 1026 bytes (of a 32256 byte maximum)

The exact message may differ depending on your board and Arduino version; it is telling
you the size of the sketch and the maximum size that your board can accept.

**Discussion**

Source code for Arduino is called a sketch. The process that takes a sketch and converts
it into a form that will work on the board is called compilation. The IDE uses a number
of command-line tools behind the scenes to compile a sketch. For more information
on this, see Recipe 17.1.

The final message telling you the size of the sketch indicates how much program space
is needed to store the controller instructions on the board. If the size of the compiled
sketch is greater than the available memory on the board, the following error message
is displayed:

Sketch too big; see http://www.arduino.cc/en/Guide/Troubleshooting#size
for tips on reducing it.

If this happens, you need to make your sketch smaller to be able to put it on the board,
or get a board with higher capacity.

If there are errors in the code, the compiler will print one or more error messages in the
console window. These messages can help identify the error—see Appendix D on soft-
ware errors for troubleshooting tips.

To prevent accidental overwriting of the examples, the Arduino IDE
does not allow you to save changes to the provided example sketches.
You must rename them using the Save As menu option. You can save
sketches you write yourself with the Save button (see Recipe 1.5).

As you develop and modify a sketch, you should also consider using the File→Save As
menu option and using a different name or version number regularly so that as you
implement each bit, you can go back to an older version if you need to.

Code uploaded onto the board cannot be downloaded back onto your
computer. Make sure you save your sketch code on your computer. You
cannot save changes back to the example files; you need to use Save As
and give the changed file another name.

**See Also**

Recipe 1.5 shows an example sketch. Appendix D has tips on troubleshooting software
problems.

**1.4 Uploading and Running the Blink Sketch**

**Problem**

You want to transfer your compiled sketch to the Arduino board and see it working.

**Solution**

Connect your Arduino board to your computer using the USB cable. Load the Blink
sketch into the IDE as described in Recipe 1.3.

Next, select Tools→Board from the drop-down menu and select the name of the board
you have connected (if it is the standard Uno board, it is probably the first entry in the
board list).

Now select Tools→Serial Port. You will get a drop-down list of available serial ports on
your computer. Each machine will have a different combination of serial ports, de-
pending on what other devices you have used with your computer.

On Windows, they will be listed as numbered COM entries. If there is only one entry,
select it. If there are multiple entries, your board will probably be the last entry.

On the Mac, your board will be listed twice if it is an Uno board:

/dev/tty.usbmodem-XXXXXXX

/dev/cu.usbmodem-XXXXXXX

If you have an older board, it will be listed as follows:

/dev/tty.usbserial-XXXXXXX

/dev/cu.usbserial-XXXXXXX

Each board will have different values for XXXXXXX. Select either entry.

Click on the upload button (in Figure 1-6, it’s the second button from the left), or
choose File→Upload to I/O board (Ctrl-U, ⌘+U on a Mac).

The software will compile the code, as in Recipe 1.3. After the software is compiled, it
is uploaded to the board. If you look at your board, you will see the LED stop flashing,
and two lights (labeled as Serial LEDs in Figure 1-4) just below the previously flashing
LED should flicker for a couple of seconds as the code uploads. The original light should
then start flashing again as the code runs.

**Discussion**

For the IDE to send the compiled code to the board, the board needs to be plugged in
to the computer, and you need to tell the IDE which board and serial port you are using.

When an upload starts, whatever sketch is running on the board is stopped (if you were
running the Blink sketch, the LED will stop flashing). The new sketch is uploaded to
the board, replacing the previous sketch. The new sketch will start running when the
upload has successfully completed.

Older Arduino boards and some compatibles do not automatically in-
terrupt the running sketch to initiate upload. In this case, you need to
press the Reset button on the board just after the software reports that
it is done compiling (when you see the message about the size of the
sketch). It may take a few attempts to get the timing right between the
end of the compilation and pressing the Reset button.

The IDE will display an error message if the upload is not successful. Problems are
usually due to the wrong board or serial port being selected or the board not being
plugged in. The currently selected board and serial port are displayed in the status bar
at the bottom of the Arduino window

If you have trouble identifying the correct port on Windows, try unplugging the board
and then selecting Tools→Serial Port to see which COM port is no longer on the display
list. Another approach is to select the ports, one by one, until you see the lights on the
board flicker to indicate that the code is uploading.

**See Also**

The Arduino troubleshooting page: http://www.arduino.cc/en/Guide/Troubleshooting.

**1.5 Creating and Saving a Sketch**

**Problem**

You want to create a sketch and save it to your computer.

**Solution**

To open an editor window ready for a new sketch, launch the IDE (see Recipe 1.3), go
to the File menu, and select New. Paste the following code into the Sketch Editor win-
dow (it’s similar to the Blink sketch, but the blinks last twice as long):

const int ledPin = 13; // LED connected to digital pin 13

void setup()
{
pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT);
}
void loop()
{
digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
delay(2000);
digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW);
delay(2000);
}
// set the LED on
// wait for two seconds
// set the LED off
// wait for two seconds

Compile the code by clicking the compile button (the top-left button with a triangle
inside), or select Sketch→Verify/Compile (see Recipe 1.3).

Upload the code by clicking on the upload button, or choose File→Upload to I/O board
(see Recipe 1.4). After uploading, the LED should blink, with each flash lasting two
seconds.

You can save this sketch to your computer by clicking the Save button, or select
File→Save.

You can save the sketch using a new name by selecting the Save As menu option. A
dialog box will open where you can enter the filename.

**Discussion**

When you save a file in the IDE, a standard dialog box for the operating system will
open. It suggests that you save the sketch to a folder called Arduino in your My Docu-
ments folder (or your Documents folder on a Mac). You can replace the default sketch
name with a meaningful name that reflects the purpose of your sketch. Click Save to
save the file.

The default name is the word sketch followed by the current date. Se-
quential letters starting from a are used to distinguish sketches created
on the same day. Replacing the default name with something meaning-
ful helps you to identify the purpose of a sketch when you come back
to it later.

If you use characters that the IDE does not allow (e.g., the space character), the IDE
will automatically replace these with valid characters.

Arduino sketches are saved as plain text files with the extension .ino. Older versions of
the IDE used the .pde extension, also used by Processing. They are automatically saved
in a folder with the same name as the sketch.

You can save your sketches to any folder on your computer, but if you use the default
folder (the Arduino folder in your Documents folder) your sketches will automatically
appear in the Sketchbook menu of the Arduino software and be easier to locate.

If you have edited one of the examples from the Arduino download, you
will not be able to save the changed file using the same filename. This
preserves the standard examples intact. If you want to save a modified
example, you will need to select another location for the sketch.

After you have made changes, you will see a dialog box asking if you want to save the
sketch when a sketch is closed.

The § symbol following the name of the sketch in the top bar of the IDE
window indicates that the sketch code has changes that have not yet
been saved on the computer. This symbol is removed when you save the
sketch.

The Arduino software does not provide any kind of version control, so if you want to
be able to revert to older versions of a sketch, you can use Save As regularly and give
each revision of the sketch a slightly different name.

Frequent compiling as you modify or add code is a good way to check for errors as you
write your code. It will be easier to find and fix any errors because they will usually be
associated with what you have just written.

Once a sketch has been uploaded onto the board there is no way to
download it back to your computer. Make sure you save any changes
to your sketches that you want to keep.

If you try and save a sketch file that is not in a folder with the same name as the sketch,
the IDE will inform you that this can’t be opened as is and suggest you click OK to
create the folder for the sketch with the same name.

Sketches must be located in a folder with the same name as the sketch.
The IDE will create the folder automatically when you save a new sketch.

Sketches made with older versions of Arduino software have a different
file extension (.pde). The IDE will open them, when you save the sketch
it will create a file with the new extension (.ino). Code written for early
versions of the IDE may not be able to compile in version 1.0. Most of
the changes to get old code running are easy to do. See Appendix H for
more details.

**See Also**

The code in this recipe and throughout this book use the const int expression to
provide meaningful names (ledPin) for constants instead of numbers (13). See
Recipe 17.5 for more on the use of constants.
1.6 Using Arduino
Problem
You want to get started with a project that is easy to build and fun to use.
Solution
This recipe provides a taste of some of the techniques that are covered in detail in later
chapters.
The sketch is based on the LED blinking code from the previous recipe, but instead of
using a fixed delay, the rate is determined by a light-sensitive sensor called a light de-
pendent resistor or LDR (see Recipe 6.2). Wire the LDR as shown in Figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8. Arduino with light dependent resistor
If you are not familiar with building a circuit from a schematic, see
Appendix B for step-by-step illustrations on how to make this circuit on
a breadboard.

The following sketch reads the light level of an LDR connected to analog pin 0. The
light level striking the LDR will change the blink rate of the internal LED connected to
pin 13:
const int ledPin = 13;
const int sensorPin = 0;
// LED connected to digital pin 13
// connect sensor to analog input 0
void setup()
{
pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT); // enable output on the led pin
}
void loop()
{
int rate = analogRead(sensorPin);
// read the analog input
digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
// set the LED on
delay(rate);
// wait duration dependent on light level
digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW);
// set the LED off
delay(rate);
}
Discussion
The value of the 4.7K resistor is not critical. Anything from 1K to 10K can be used. The
light level on the LDR will change the voltage level on analog pin 0. The analogRead
command (see Chapter 6) provides a value that ranges from around 200 when the LDR
is dark to 800 or so when it is very bright. This value determines the duration of the
LED on and off times, so the blink time increases with light intensity.
You can scale the blink rate by using the Arduino map function as follows:
const int ledPin = 13;
const int sensorPin = 0;
// LED connected to digital pin 13
// connect sensor to analog input 0
// the next two lines set the min and max delay between blinks
const int minDuration = 100; // minimum wait between blinks
const int maxDuration = 1000; // maximum wait between blinks
void setup()
{
pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT);
}
// enable output on the led pin
void loop()
{
int rate = analogRead(sensorPin);
// read the analog input
// the next line scales the blink rate between the min and max values
rate = map(rate, 200,800,minDuration, maxDuration); // convert to blink rate
rate = constrain(rate, minDuration,maxDuration);
// constrain the value

digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
delay(rate);
digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW);
delay(rate);
// set the LED on
// wait duration dependent on light level
// set the LED off
Recipe 5.7 provides more details on using the map function to scale values. Recipe 3.5
has details on using the constrain function to ensure values do not exceed a given range.
If you want to view the value of the rate variable on your computer, you can print this
to the Arduino Serial Monitor as shown in the revised loop code that follows. The
sketch will display the blink rate in the Serial Monitor. You open the Serial Monitor
window in the Arduino IDE by clicking on the icon on the right of the top bar (see
Chapter 4 for more on using the Serial Monitor):
const int ledPin = 13;
const int sensorPin = 0;
// LED connected to digital pin 13
// connect sensor to analog input 0
// the next two lines set the min and max delay between blinks
const int minDuration = 100; // minimum wait between blinks
const int maxDuration = 1000; // maximum wait between blinks
void setup()
{
pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT);
Serial.begin(9600);
}
// enable output on the led pin
// initialize Serial
void loop()
{
int rate = analogRead(sensorPin);
// read the analog input
// the next line scales the blink rate between the min and max values
rate = map(rate, 200,800,minDuration, maxDuration); // convert to blink rate
rate = constrain(rate, minDuration,maxDuration);
// constrain the value
}
Serial.println(rate);
digitalWrite(ledPin, HIGH);
delay(rate);
digitalWrite(ledPin, LOW);
delay(rate);
// print rate to serial monitor
// set the LED on
// wait duration dependent on light level
// set the LED off
You can use the LDR to control the pitch of a sound by connecting a small speaker to
the pin, as shown in Figure 1-9.

You will need to increase the on/off rate on the pin to a frequency in the audio spectrum.
This is achieved, as shown in the following code, by decreasing the min and max
durations:
const int outputPin = 9;
const int sensorPin = 0;
// Speaker connected to digital pin 9
// connect sensor to analog input 0
const int minDuration = 1; // 1ms on, 1ms off (500 Hz)
const int maxDuration = 10; // 10ms on, 10ms off (50 hz)
void setup()
{
pinMode(outputPin, OUTPUT);
}
// enable output on the led pin
void loop()
{
int sensorReading = analogRead(sensorPin);
// read the analog input
int rate = map(sensorReading, 200,800,minDuration, maxDuration);
rate = constrain(rate, minDuration,maxDuration);
// constrain the value
}
digitalWrite(outputPin, HIGH);
delay(rate);
digitalWrite(outputPin, LOW);
delay(rate);
20 | Chapter 1: Getting Started
// set the LED on
// wait duration dependent on light level
// set the LED off

See Also
See Recipe 3.5 for details on using the constrain function.
See Recipe 5.7 for a discussion on the map function.
If you are interested in creating sounds, see Chapter 9 for a full discussion on audio
output with Arduino.


