~Preface

While writing any book on any topic, the ﬁrst question that has to be confronted is: Why one more book on this topic? Our 
justiﬁcation: we have taught the material in the book for several years to students of Master of Science degree program 
in Statistics at the University of Mysore. A student with only a basic knowledge of Linear Algebra, Probability Theory and 
Statistics, and wanting to understand the basic concepts of Linear Models, Linear Estimation, Testing of Linear 
Hypotheses, basics of Design and Analysis of Experiments and the standard Models, will ﬁnd this book useful. The book is 
targeted at beginners. Proofs are given in detail to help the uninitiated. We expect the reader to get motivated by the 
basics in the book and refer advanced literature on the topics to learn more. This book is intended as a leisurely bridge 
to advanced topics. With a surge in interest in Data Science, Big Data and whatnot, we wish that this rigorous treatment 
will kindle interest in the reader to explore advanced topics.

The ﬁrst two chapters consist of the basic theory of Linear Models covering estimability, Gauss-Markov theorem, 
conﬁdence interval estimation and testing of linear hypotheses. The later chapters consist of the general theory of 
design and analysis of general complete/incomplete Block Designs, Completely Randomized Design, Randomized Block Design, 
Balanced Incomplete Block Design, Partially Balanced Incomplete Block Design, general Row-Column Designs with Latin Square 
Design and Youden Square Design as particular cases, symmetric Factorial Experiments with factors at two/three levels 
including Partial and Complete Confounding, Missing Plot Technique, Analysis of Covariance Models, Split-Plot and 
Split-Block Designs. The material covered in these chapters should give a fairly good idea of the design and analysis of 
statistical experiments. Every chapter ends with some exercises which are intended as practice exercises to understand the 
theory discussed in the chapter. The ﬁrst exercise of every chapter encourages readers to provide missing steps, or 
deliberately left out steps, in some of the discussions in the chapter. Exercises in the ﬁrst two chapters and some in 
later~

~chapters are original and the data accompanying many exercises may be from other books on this subject. Since the 
references to these could not be ascertained, we take this opportunity to gratefully acknowledge all the authors and 
publishers for some of the numerical data used here. Since the book is intended as a ﬁrst course, historical references 
and citations are not given, even for the quotes at the beginning of every chapter except for the names of the authors of 
the quotes. R-codes are given at the end of every chapter after Exercises. These should help the reader to explore the 
material in R, an open-source software. The book ends with Bibliography which contains a list of books for further 
reading, and a subject index.

The approach used is algebraic and is aimed at a beginner who has some exposure to Linear Algebra, Probability Theory and 
Statistics. The material can be covered in a one semester course. Before retiring from active service in the year 2003 as 
Professor of Statistics, Prof. N. R. Mohan had taught the material here for more than twenty ﬁve years to several 
students of the M.Sc. Statistics program of the University of Mysore. Subsequently, the undersigned, his student, has 
taught this subject for more than twenty years. Though we started writing this book several years ago, after ﬁnishing 
drafts of a few chapters, the book did not see the light of the day. Upon the insistence of Professor Mohan’s wife, this 
compilation has been done for wider dissemination.

My sincere gratitude to Mrs. Geeta Mohan for pushing me towards completing the book and to Mrs. Padmashri Ambekar, 
daughter of Prof. N. R. Mohan, for help with the publication. My sincere thanks to Dr. A. S. Praveena for the R-codes in 
the book and for all help received while preparing this book for publication and to Mr. Shamim Ahmad, Senior Editor, 
Springer India, for facilitating the process of publication, and for tolerating my many e-mail queries. I fully own 
responsibility for any errors and omissions. I will be grateful for your comments and criticisms.~

~Chapter 1

Linear Estimation

Everything should always be made as simple as possible, but not simpler

– A. Einstein

In many modeling problems, a response variable is modeled as a function of one or more independent or explanatory 
variables. The linear function of the explanatory variables along with a random error term has been found useful and 
applicable to many problems, for example, the weight of a newborn human baby as a function of the circumference of her 
head or shoulder, the price of crude oil as a function of currency exchange rates, the length of elongation of a weighing 
spring as a function of the loaded weight, and whatnot. Many such and similar problems are modeled using a linear model. 
In fact, all linear regression models are full-rank linear models. This chapter discusses linear estimation in a linear 
model. The subsequent chapter discusses the other aspect of such modeling, which is linear hypotheses. The material 
discussed in the ﬁrst two chapters are applied to speciﬁc models in later chapters. R-codes for the topics discussed in 
this chapter are given at the end of Chap.2.

1.1 Gauss–Markov Model

Consideran n × 1 randomvector Y = (Y 1 . . . Y n ) ′ ofrandomvariables Y 1 , . . . , Y n , with expectation

E(Y) := (E(Y 1 ) . . . E(Y n )) ′ = Aθ,~

~and dispersion matrix

V (Y) := E((Y − E(Y))(Y − E(Y)) ′ ) = σ 2 I n ,

where θ = ( θ 1 . . . θ p ) is a p × 1 vector of real-valued parameters θ 1 , . . . , θ p , which are unknown, A is an n × 
p matrix of known entries called the design matrix, σ 2 > 0 is unknown. Throughout, we shall denote the identity matrix of 
order n by I n or by I if its order is clear from the context, and the transpose of B, a vector or a matrix, by B ′ . Note 
that the expected value of Y i is a known linear function of the same set of p unknown parameters θ 1 , . . . , θ p , i = 
1, . . . , n, Y 1 , . . . , Y n are pairwise uncorrelated and that each Y i has the same unknown variance σ 2 > 0. The 
last property is referred to as homoscedasticity, meaning equal variances, the opposite of heteroscedasticity. Note also 
that if we write Y = Aθ + , where  = ( 1 . . .  n ) ′ is assumed to be the random error, then E() = 0 and, V () = σ 2 I, 
called the error variance. In this chapter, we will have no more assumptions about the probability distribution of Y. 
However, we assume n ≥ p throughout the book. The discussion about models where n < p is outside the scope of this book.

′

The triple ( Y, Aθ, σ 2 I ) is called a Gauss–Markov model or a linear model. Observe that the design matrix speciﬁes the 
model completely. By the rank of the model, we mean the rank of the design matrix A. The model is called a full-rank model 
if Rank(A) = p ; otherwise, it is called a less-than-full-rank model. We shall reserve the symbol s to denote the rank of 
A so that 1 ≤ s ≤ p ≤ n.

The model given above is the natural model for the random variables associated with many experiments, and the parameters θ 
1 , . . . , θ p represent the unknown quantities of interest to the experimenter. In most cases, the very purpose of 
conducting the experiment is to obtain estimates of and conﬁdence intervals for linear functions of θ 1 , . . . , θ p , 
and also to test hypotheses involving these parameters. In this chapter, we discuss the problem of estimation. Our search 
for the best estimators of linear functions of the parameters θ 1 , . . . , θ p , best in a sense to be clariﬁed later, 
will be conﬁned to the class of estimators which are linear functions of Y 1 , . . . , Y n . With the minimal assumptions 
that we have on the distribution of Y, we will not be able to admit nonlinear estimators to compete.

In what follows, y = (y 1 . . . y n ) ′ denotes a realization of Y.

1.2 Estimability

A linear parametric function (lpf) a ′ θ = a 1 θ 1 + · · · + a p θ p , a = (a 1 . . . a p ) ′ ∈ R p , the p-dimensional 
Euclidean space, is said to be estimable if there exists a linear function c ′ Y = c 1 Y 1 + · · · + c n Y n of Y 1 , . . 
. , Y n , such that E(c ′ Y) = a ′ θ for all θ = (θ 1 . . . θ p ) ′ ∈ R p , for some c = (c 1 . . . c n ) ′ ∈ R n . In 
other words, a ′ θ is estimable if c ′ Y is an unbiased estimator of a ′ θ. In this case, a ′ θ is called an estimable 
linear parametric function (elpf) and c ′ Y is called a linear unbiased~

~estimator of a ′ θ. As is evident from the examples that follow, not every lpf need be estimable in a Gauss–Markov model.

The following theorem, which can be stated in several equivalent forms, gives a criterion for an lpf to be estimable.

Theorem 1.2.1 A necessary and sufﬁcient condition for an lpf a ′ θ = a 1 θ 1 + · · · + a p θ p to be estimable is that

Rank(A) = Rank(A ′

:

a),

(1.2.1)

where (A ′ : a) denotes the matrix A ′ augmented with a.

Proof If a ′ θ is estimable, by deﬁnition, there exists a c ′ Y = c 1 Y 1 + · · · + c n Yn  such that a ′ θ = E(c ′ Y) = 
c ′ E(Y) = c ′ Aθ for all θ ∈ R p . Hence A ′ c = a and this implies (1.2.1). Conversely, if (1.2.1) holds, then A ′ c = 
a for some vector c ∈ R n , and c ′ Y is unbiased for a ′ θ. Hence a ′ θ is estimable.

Corollary 1.2.2 An lpf a ′ θ is estimable iff

Rank(A ′ A) = Rank(A ′ A : a).

(1.2.2)

Proof If a ′ θ is estimable, then (1.2.1) holds. Since

Rank(A ′ A) ≤ Rank(A ′ A : a)

A0n×1  = Rank(A ′ : a) ( 0 1 )

′ ≤ Rank(A : a) = Rank(A)

= Rank(A ′ A),

it follows that (1.2.2) holds. Conversely, if (1.2.2) holds, then there exists a vector d such that A ′ Ad = a. Then the 
linear estimator d ′ A ′ Y is unbiased for a ′ θ since E ( d ′ A ′ Y ) = d ′ A ′ E(Y) = d ′ A ′ Aθ = a ′ θ and a ′ θ is 
estimable.

Remark 1.2.3 The conditions (1.2.1) and (1.2.2) are, respectively, equivalent to a ∈ C(A ′ ) and a ∈ C(A ′ A), where 
C(B) denotes the column space of the matrix B.

Remark 1.2.4 The conditions (1.2.1) and (1.2.2) are necessary and sufﬁcient for the consistency of the linear equations A 
′ c = a and A ′ Ad = a, respectively.

Corollary 1.2.5 If a 1 ′ θ = a 11 θ 1 + · · · + a 1p θ p and a 2 ′ θ = a 21 θ 1 + · · · + a 2p θp  are estimable and c 1 
and c 2 are scalars, then c 1 a 1 ′ θ + c 2 a 2 ′ θ is also estimable.

The proof follows easily from the deﬁnition of estimability (see Exercise1.1).

Lemma 1.2.6 Every lpf in a Gauss–Markov model is estimable iff it is a full-rank model.~

~Proof Suppose a ′ θ is estimable for every a ∈ R p . Then θ 1 , . . . , θ p are estimable. Write θ i = J i ′ θ, i = 1, . 
. . , p, where J i denotes the ith column of I p . By Corollary1.2.2, p ≥ Rank(A ′ A)= Rank(A ′ A : J 1 : · · · : J p ) 
≥ Rank(J 1 . . . J p ) = Rank(I p ) = p and hence Rank(A ′ A) = Rank(A) = p, proving the necessity. If Rank(A) = p, then 
Rank(A ′ A : a) = p for every a ∈ R p and a ′ θ is estimable. Remark 1.2.7 Aθ and A ′ Aθ are estimable, that is, every 
component of these two vectors is an elpf. The claims follow easily from the deﬁnition of an elpf since

E(Y) = Aθ and E(A ′ Y) = A ′ Aθ.

Remark 1.2.8 Let V = { b ∈ R p : A ′ Ab = 0 } . Then V is a vector space of dimension p − s and is orthogonal to C(A ′ 
A). It is easy to see that if b ∈ V, then b ′ θ is not estimable. However, if b ′ θ is not estimable, it does not follow 
that b ∈ V.

Let B p×(p−s) denote the matrix whose columns constitute a basis for the vector space V in Remark1.2.8. Note that A ′ AB 
= 0 and AB = 0. The following theorem gives yet another criterion for the estimability of an lpf.

Theorem 1.2.9 Let B p×(p−s) be a matrix such that AB = 0 and Rank(B) = p − s. Then an lpf a ′ θ is estimable iff a ′ B = 
0.

Proof If a ′ θ is estimable, then by Remark1.2.3, a ∈ C(A ′ A). This implies that a ′ b = 0 for any b ∈ V and hence a ′ 
B = 0. Suppose now that a ′ B = 0. Then a ∈ C(A ′ A) and a ′ θ is estimable by Remark1.2.3.

Note that the columns of the matrix B in Theorem1.2.9 constitute a basis for the vector space V in Remark1.2.8 and hence B 
is not unique. In fact, if B ∗ is any nonsingular matrix of order p − s and B 1 = BB ∗ , then a ′ B = 0 iff a ′ B 1 = 
0.

Theorem1.2.9 is particularly useful when we want to examine several lpf’s for estimability in a given Gauss–Markov model. 
Note that when compared to the veriﬁcation of condition (1.2.1) or (1.2.2) for estimability, the veriﬁcation of the 
condition a ′ B = 0 is trivial. Our attempt will be to ﬁnd a B satisfying the conditions of Theorem1.2.9 for each 
Gauss–Markov model that we introduce later. In the following remark, a method of ﬁnding the B matrix is described.

Remark 1.2.10 Let (A ′ A) − be a generalized inverse (g-inverse) of A ′ A, that is, A ′ A = A ′ A(A ′ A) − A ′ A. It 
follows from the deﬁnition of a g-inverse that (A ′ A) − A ′ A and I p − (A ′ A) − A ′ A areidempotent.Since s = 
Rank(A ′ A) = Rank ′ ′ ( A ′ A(A ′ A) − A ′ A ) ≤ Rank ( (A ′ A) − A ′ A ) ≤ Rank(A A),we have Rank(A A) = Rank ( (A ′ 
A) − A ′ A ) . Hence Rank ( I p −(A ′ A)− A ′ A ) = trace ( I p −(A ′ A) − A ′ A ) = p − trace ( (A ′ A) − A ′ A ) 
= p − s. Further, (A ′ A) ( I p − (A ′ A) − A ′ A ) = 0. So one can choose the matrix B as the one obtained by deleting 
all the s linearly dependent columns in I p − (A ′ A) − A ′ A.

Linear parametric functions a 1 ′ θ, . . . , a m ′ θ are said to be independent (orthogonal) if the associated vectors a 1 
, . . . , a m are linearly independent (orthogonal), ′ where a i = ( a i1 . . . a ip ) , i = 1, . . . , m.~

~Lemma 1.2.11 In any given set of elpf’s, the maximum number of independent elpf’s is not more than s.

Proof If possible, let a 1 ′ θ, . . . , a m ′ θ be independent elpf’s with m > s. By Theorem1.2.1, s = Rank(A) = Rank ( A 
′ : a 1 : · · · : a m ) ≥ Rank (a 1 . . . a m ) = m. This contradiction establishes the claim.

Note that, by Remark1.2.7, Aθ has n elpf’s of which only s are independent. An lpf a ′ θ is called a contrast or a 
comparison in θ if a 1 + · · · + a p = 0.

Example 1.2.12 Let Y 1 , Y 2 , Y 3 , Y 4 , and Y 5 be pairwise uncorrelated random variables with common variance σ 2 > 0 
and expectations given by

E(Y 1 ) = θ 1 − θ 2 + θ 4 ,

E(Y 2 ) = θ 1 + θ 2 + θ 3 ,

E(Y 3 ) = 2θ 2 + θ 3 − θ 4 ,

E(Y 4 ) = θ 1 + 3θ 2 + 2θ 3 − θ 4 ,

E(Y 5 ) = 2θ 1 + θ 3 + θ 4 .

In this model, n = 5, p = 4, and the design matrix is

1 −1 0 1 ⎛ 1 1 1 0 ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ A = ⎜ ⎜ 0 2 1 −1 ⎟ ⎟ . ⎜ 1 3 2 −1 ⎟ ⎝ 2 0 1 1 ⎠

We shall obtain a criterion for a ′ θ = a 1 θ 1 + a 2 θ 2 + a 3 θ 3 + a 4 θ 4 to be estimable in this model as well as the 
rank of the model, simultaneously. We use the fact that the elementary transformations will not alter the rank of a 
matrix. We have

1 1 0 1 2a1  ⎛ −1 1 2 3 0 a 2 ⎞ ′ Rank(A : a) = Rank ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ 0 1 1 2 1a3  ⎝ 1 0 −1 −1 1 a 4 ⎠

11012a1  ⎛ 0 2 2 4 2 a 1 + a 2 ⎞ = Rank ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ 01121a3  ⎝ 0 1 1 2 1 a 1 − a 4 ⎠

11012a1  ⎛ 0 2 2 4 2 a 1 + a 2 ⎞ = Rank ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ 0 0 0 0 0 a 1 + a 2 − 2a3  ⎝ 0 0 0 0 0 (a 1 + a 2 ) − 2(a 1 − a 
4 ) ⎠

= Rank(A)~

~= 2 iff a 1 + a 2 − 2a 3 = 0 and a 1 − a 2 − 2a 4 = 0.

By Theorem1.2.1, a ′ θ is estimable iff

a 1 + a 2 − 2a 3 = 0 and a 1 − a 2 − 2a 4 = 0,

1 1 −2 0 . Note that AB = 0 and B is the ( 1 −1 0 −2 ) matrix satisfying the conditions of Theorem1.2.9. By 
postmultiplying B by the 1/2 1/2 nonsingular matrix ,we get another pair of equivalent conditions on a ( 1/2 −1/2 ) as

that is, a ′ B = 0 with B ′ =

a 1 − a 3 − a 4 = 0 and a 2 − a 3 + a 4 = 0.

Example 1.2.13 LetY = ( Y 11 . . . Y 1n 1 Y 21 . . . Y 2n 2 . . . Y v1 . . . Y vn v ) ′ = ( Y 1 ′ Y 2 ′ . . . Y v ′ ) ′ 
with Y i = ( Y i1 . . . Y in i ) , and Y i j , j = 1, . . . , n i , i = 1, . . . , v, be pairwise uncorrelated random 
variables with common variance σ 2 > 0 and expectations E(Y i j ) = ′ ′ ′ μ + α i . We write E(Y) = Aθ with θ = ( μ α ) , 
α = (α 1 . . . α v ) , and

′

I n 1 I n 1 O n 1 ×1 .. On 1 ×1  ⎛ I n 2 O n 2 ×1 I n 2 . . O n 2 ×1 ⎞ A = ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ , . . . .. . ⎝ I n v O n v ×1 O 
n v ×1 . . I n v ⎠

where I m or I, if m is clear from the context, denotes the m-component column vector with each component equal to 1 and O 
m×n denotes the null matrix of order m × n which will be written as 0 if m = 1 = n or if m and n are clear from the 
context. In this model, n = n 1 + · · · + n v , p = v + 1, and

n n1 n 2 . .nv  ⎛ n 1 n 1 0 . . 0 ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ n I ′ N s = Rank(A ′ A)= Rank ⎜ ⎜ n 2 0 n 2 0 . 0 ⎟ ⎟ = Rank = Rank(N) = 
v, NI N ) ⎜ . . . . . . ⎟ ( ⎝ n v 0 0 . . n v ⎠

since the ﬁrst row (column) of A ′ A is the sum of the remaining rows (columns), where N = diag(n 1 , . . . , n v ) is 
the diagonal matrix. To obtain a criterion for the estimability of a ′ θ = a 0 μ + a 1 ′ α = a 0 μ + a 11 α 1 + · · · + a 
1v α v , we look for conditions on a = (a 0 a 1 ′ ) ′ that satisfy (1.2.2). Recalling that the ﬁrst column of A ′ A is 
the sum of the remaining columns and that multiplication by a nonsingular matrix does not alter the rank, we get~

~Rank ( A ′ A : a ) = Rank ( N I N a 1 )

I ′ N a0  = Rank ( N a 1 )

−1 I v ′ I ′ N a0  = Rank ( 0 v×1 I v ) ( N a 1 )

0 −a 0 + I ′ a1  = Rank ( N a 1 )

= Rank(N)

= Rank(A ′ A)

iff −a 0 + I ′ a 1 = 0. Thus a ′ θ = a 0 μ + a 1 ′ α is estimable iff a 0 = ∑ i=1 v a 1i or a ′ B = 0, where B = (−1 I 
v ′ ) ′ . Note that AB = 0.

In this model, note that none of the individual parameters μ , α 1 , . . . , α v , is estimable and that an lpf a 1 ′ α of 
α alone is estimable iff I ′ a 1 = 0, that is, a 1 ′ α is a contrast in α.

Remark 1.2.14 We have the above model for the random variables associated with experiments employing a Completely 
Randomized Design, abbreviated as CRD. In CRD, v treatments are randomly allocated to n homogeneous plots, grouped into v 
groups, such that the ith treatment is allotted to all the plots in the ith group with n i plots. We will discuss designs 
in later chapters.

1.3 Least Squares Estimate

We have seen in the last section that in a Gauss–Markov model, not every lpf need be estimable unless the model is a 
full-rank model. Since unbiasedness is one of the criteria which is insisted upon almost always, we will search for the 
best estimates of elpf’s only, best in some sense to be made precise later. Further, as mentioned earlier, this search 
will be conﬁned to the class of linear estimates only. For this purpose, we need the least squares estimate of θ.

As mentioned in Sect.1.1, y = (y 1 . . . y n ) ′ is a realization of Y. Any value of ˆ θ, say θ ˆ = θ(y), for which

S(y, θ) = (y − Aθ) ′ (y − Aθ)

(1.3.1)

is least, is called a least squares estimate of θ. Differentiating S(y, θ) partially with respect to θ 1 , . . . , θ p and 
equating the derivatives to zero, we get what is known as the normal equation, written as the matrix equation

A ′ Aθ = A ′ y.

(1.3.2)~

~We claim that the normal equation (1.3.2) is consistent, that is, Rank(A ′ A) = Rank(A ′ A : A ′ y). This follows since 
Rank(A ′ A) ≤ Rank(A ′ A : A ′ y) = Rank(A ′ (A : y)) ≤ Rank(A ′ ) = Rank(A ′ A). Thus, the normal equation (1.3.2) is 
guaranteed to have at least one solution.

When the Gauss–Markov model is a full-rank model, A ′ A is nonsingular and (1.3.2) has the unique solution given by θ ˆ = 
(A ′ A) −1 A ′ y. Otherwise, it has inﬁnite solutions.Togetasolutionof(1.3.2)inthiscase,wecanproceedasfollows.Wedelete 
all those p − s linearly dependent rows of A ′ A and the corresponding entries in A ′ y. We replace the deleted rows with 
any p − s rows so that the resulting matrix is nonsingular and we replace the corresponding entries in A ′ y with zeroes. 
The new matrix equation so obtained will then have a unique solution θ ˆ = (A ′ A) − A ′ y, where (A ′ A) − is a 
g-inverse of A ′ A.

Lemma 1.3.1 Any solution of the normal equation (1.3.2) is a least squares estimate of θ.

Proof Let

ˆ θ be a solution of (1.3.2). Then

′ (y A (y A S(y, θ) = θ) ˆ + A( θ ˆ − θ) θ) ˆ + A( θ ˆ − θ) ( ) ( )

= (y − A θ) ˆ ′ (y − A θ) ˆ + 2( θ ˆ − θ) ′ A ′ (y − A θ) ˆ + ( θ ˆ − θ) ′ A ′ A( θ ˆ − θ)

= (y − A θ) ˆ ′ (y − A θ) ˆ + ( θ ˆ − θ) ′ A ′ A( θ ˆ − θ)

′ ˆ ≥ (y − A θ) ˆ (y − A θ)

ˆ = S(y, θ),

since ( ˆ θ−θ) ′ A ′ (y− A ˆ θ)=(θ ˆ − θ) ′ (A ′ y − A ′ A θ) ˆ = 0 and ( θ ˆ − θ) ′ A ′ A( θ ˆ − θ) ≥ 0. ˆ Hence 
S(y, θ) is least at θ = θ, any solution of the normal equation.

In view of this lemma, we will use the phrases ‘a least squares estimate of θ’ and ‘a solution of the normal equation 
(1.3.2)’ interchangeably.

Whenever it is convenient, we will call the ith equation in (1.3.2) as the equation corresponding to θ i and the ith 
column (row) of A ′ A as that of θ i , i = 1, . . . , p.

Remark 1.3.2 Let the Gauss–Markov model be less-than-full-rank model and let ˜θ θ ˆ and be any two distinct solutions of 
the normal equation (1.3.2). Then A ′ A( θ ˆ −

˜θ ′ ˜θ ˜θ ˆ θ) ˆ θ) ˆ − (y − A ) ′ ′ θ′  ˜θ ) = 0 and ˜θ (y − A (y ˜θ − A (y − A ) = (y y − A ′ y) − (y ′ y ′ A ′ 
y) = ( − θ) ′ ˆ A ′ y = ( − θ) ′ ˆ A ′ A θ ˆ = 0. Therefore, the value of S(y, θ) at any

solution of the normal equation (1.3.2) is the same, as it should be.

ˆ If θ ˆ is any solution of the normal equation (1.3.2), then S(y, θ) ˆ = y ′ y − θ ′ A ′ y is called the residual sum of 
squares or the error sum of squares or sum of squares for error (SSE).~

~Let (A ′ A) − be a g-inverse of A ′ A, the usual inverse if s = p. Then θ ˆ = ˆ (A ′ A) − A ′ y is a solution of the 
normal equation (1.3.2). Substituting this in S(y, θ), we get

SSE = S(y, θ) ˆ = y ′ y − y ′ A(A ′ A) − A ′ y

= y ′ ( I − A(A ′ A) − A ′ ) y

(1.3.3)

where

= y ′ My,

(1.3.4)

M

=

I

−

A(A′ 

A)− 

A′ 

.

The vector y − A θ ˆ = My is called the residual vector. Lemma 1.3.3 The matrix M in (1.3.4) possesses the following 
properties: (i) M A = 0, (ii) M = M ′ = M 2 , and (iii) Rank(M) = n − s.

Proof Let G = M A = A(I − (A ′ A) − A ′ A). Then G ′ G = (I − (A ′ A) − A ′ A) ′ A ′ A (I − (A ′ A) − A ′ A) = 0 
using the deﬁnition of g-inverse of A ′ A. Therefore, G is a null matrix and M A = 0. Now M 2 = M − M A(A ′ A) − A ′ = 
M and so M is idempotent. Further, M M ′ = (I − A(A ′ A) − A ′ )M ′ = M ′ = M since M M ′ is symmetric. Thus M is 
symmetric. It was shown in Remark1.2.10 that (A ′ A) − A ′ A is idempotent and has rank s. This and a property of trace 
of a matrix gives Rank(M) = trace(M)

= n − trace ( A(A ′ A) − A ′ )

= n − trace ( (A ′ A) − A ′ A )

= n − Rank ( (A ′ A) − A ′ A )

= n − s.


Remark 1.3.4 By Lemma1.3.3(i), we have E(MY) = 0.

ˆ θ) The ratio S(y,

= SSE is called the mean squares for error (MSE). We will n−s show in the next lemma that MSE is an unbiased estimate of 
σ 2 .

n−s

ˆ θ) Lemma 1.3.5 An unbiased estimate of σ 2 is MSE = S(Y,

n−s

= SSE . n−s

Proof To prove the lemma, consider a solution From (1.3.3) and Lemma1.3.3, we have

ˆ θ(Y) of the normal equation (1.3.2).

S(Y, ˆ θ(Y)) = Y ′ MY = (Y − Aθ) ′ M (Y − Aθ) = trace ( M (Y − Aθ) (Y − Aθ) ′ ) .

In the last step, we have used a property of trace of a matrix. So

E(S(Y, ˆ θ(Y))) = trace(E(M (Y − Aθ) (Y − Aθ) ′ ))~

~= trace ( M E((Y − Aθ) (Y − Aθ) ′ ) )

= trace ( σ 2 M )

= σ 2 Rank(M)

= (n − s)σ2 

using Lemma1.3.3 and a property of trace of a matrix once again. The claim follows from this.

Example 1.3.6 Consider the Gauss–Markov model in Example1.2.12. Let y = (y 1 y 2 y 3 y 4 y 5 ) ′ be an observation on Y. 
We have

7 3 5 2 y 1 + y 2 + y 4 + 2y 5 x1  ⎛ 3 15 9 −6 ⎞ ⎛ −y 1 + y 2 + 2y 3 + 3y 4 ⎞ ⎛ x 2 ⎞ A ′ A = ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ , and A 
′ y = ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ = x, say. 5 9 7 −2 y 2 + y 3 + 2y 4 + y 5 x3  ⎝ 2 −6 −2 4 ⎠ ⎝ y 1 − y 3 − y 4 + y 
5 ⎠ ⎝ x 4 ⎠

The normal equation A ′ A

θ ˆ = A

′

y can be written explicitly as

7 θ 1 ˆ + 3 θ 2 ˆ + 5 θ 3 ˆ + 2 θ 4 ˆ = x 1 ,

3 θ 1 ˆ + 15 θ 2 ˆ + 9 θ 3 ˆ − 6 θ 4 ˆ = x 2 ,

5 θ 1 ˆ + 9 θ 2 ˆ + 7 θ 3 ˆ − 2 θ 4 ˆ = x 3 ,

2 θ 1 ˆ − 6 θ 2 ˆ − 2 θ 3 ˆ + 4 θ 4 ˆ = x 4 .

Since s = 2 < p, the above normal equation has inﬁnite solutions. To get a solution, we have to delete two dependent 
equations. Observe that the sum of the ﬁrst and the second equation is twice the third equation and, the ﬁrst equation 
minus the second equation is twice the fourth equation. In this case, therefore, any two equations can be declared as 
dependent and can be deleted. First, let us delete the last two equations and replace them with

θ 3 ˆ = 0 and θ 4 ˆ = 0,

to get the four new equations as

7 θ 1 ˆ + 3 θ 2 ˆ = x 1 ,

3 θ 1 ˆ + 15 θ 2 ˆ = x 2 ,

θ 3 ˆ = 0,

θ 4 ˆ = 0,~

~⎛ 3 15 0 0 ⎟ ⎞ ⎜ θ 2⎟ ⎜ ⎛ x 2⎞ ⎟ or in the matrix form as ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ˆ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ . Notice that the matrix above 0 
0 1 0 ⎜ θ 3 ⎟ 0 ˆ ⎝ 0 0 0 1 ⎠ ⎝ θ 4 ⎠ ⎝ 0 ⎠

is nonsingular. Solving the two equations in and θ 2 ˆ = −3x 1 + 7x 2 and hence

ˆ θ1 

and

ˆ θ2 

above, we get

ˆ θ1 

−x2  = 5x 1 32

96

5x 1 −x 2 5 − 32 1 0 0 32 32 x1  ⎛ −3x 1 + 7x 2 ⎞ ⎛ 7 ⎞ ⎛ ⎞ x2  ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ − 32 1 0 0 ⎟ θ ˆ = ⎜ 96 ⎟ = ⎜ 96 ⎟ 
⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ = (A ′ A) − x = (A ′ A) − A ′ y, ⎜ 0 ⎟ ⎜ 0 0 0 0 ⎟ x3  x4  ⎝ 0 ⎠ ⎝ 0 0 0 0 ⎠ ⎝ ⎠

where

5 − 32 1 00 32 ⎛ − 32 1 7 0 0 ⎞ (A ′ A) − = ⎜ ⎜ 96 ⎟ ⎟ 0 0 00 ⎝ 0 0 0 0 ⎠

is a g−inverse of A ′ A.

To get another least squares estimate of θ, let us delete the second and the third equations in the normal equation above 
and replace them with

θ 1 ˆ = 0 and θ 3 ˆ = 0,

to get the four new equations as

3 θ 2 ˆ ∗ + 2 θ 4 ˆ ∗ = x 1 ,

−6 θ 2 ∗ ˆ + 4 θ 4 ˆ ∗ = x 4 ,

∗ θ 1 = 0,

∗ θ 3 = 0,

0 3 0 2 θ ∗ 1 x1  ⎛ ⎞ ⎜ ⎛ 1 0 0 0 ⎟ ⎞ ⎜ θ ∗ 2 ⎟ ⎜ ⎛ 0 ⎟ ⎞ or in the matrix form as ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ . 
Notice that the choice of the 0 0 1 0 ⎜ θ ∗ 3 ⎟ 0 ⎝ 0 −6 0 4 ⎠ ⎝ θ ∗ 4 ⎠ ⎝ x 4 ⎠

two equations

θ 1 ˆ = 0 and θ 3 ˆ = 0~

~has given us the above nonsingular matrix. Solving the two equations in + above, we get θ ∗ 2 = 2x 1 12 −x 4 and θ ∗ 4 
= 2x 1 8 x 4 and hence

ˆ θ∗ 

2

and

ˆ θ∗ 

4

0 000 0 x1  ∗ ⎛ 2x 1 −x 4 ⎞ ⎛ 1 0 0 − 12 1 ⎞ ⎛ x 2 ⎞ θ ˆ = ⎜ ⎜ 12 ⎟ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎜ 6 ⎟ ⎟ ⎜ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ = (A ′ A) + 
x = (A ′ A) + A ′ y, 0 000 0 x3  2x 1 + x 4 1 1 ⎝ 8 ⎠ ⎝ 4 0 0 8 ⎠ ⎝ x 4 ⎠

where

000 0 ⎛ 1 0 0 − 12 1 ⎞ (A ′ A) + = ⎜ ⎜ 6 ⎟ ⎟ 000 0 1 1 ⎝ 4 0 0 8 ⎠

is another g-inverse of A ′ A. Note that the g-inverse (A ′ A) + is not symmetric even though A ′ A is symmetric. The SSE 
in this model is

1 SSE = y ′ y − θ ′ ˆ A ′ y = y ′ y − θ ∗′ ˆ A ′ y = y ′ y − − 6x 1 x 2 + 7x 2 2 ) , 15x1 2  96 (

where x 1 = y1 

+ y 2 + y 4 + 2y 5 and x 2 = −y 1 + y 2 + 2y 3 + 3y 4 . Example 1.3.7 Here we will consider the Gauss–Markov model in 
Example1.2.13. ′ Let y = ( y 11 . . . y 1n 1 y 21 . . . y 2n 2 . . . y v1 . . . y vn v ) be an observation on Y. In this n 
I ′ N model, A ′ A = ′ y = (y .. y 1. . . . y v. ) ′ , where n = n 1 + · · · + and A ( N I N )

n v = I ′ N I, N = diag(n 1 , . . . , n v ), y .. = ∑ i=1 v ∑ j=1 n i y i j = ∑ i=1 v y i. and y i. =

′ ′ ∑ j=1 n i y i j ,i = 1, . . . , v. Let y ∗. = (y 1. . . . y v. ) . Thenthenormalequation A A A ′ y can be written as

n μ ˆ + I ′ N α ˆ = y .. ,

N I μ ˆ + N α ˆ = y ∗. .

θ ˆ =

Note that y .. = I ′ y ∗. and the top equation above corresponding to μ is dependent as it is the sum of the remaining α 
equations. Since s = v and p = v + 1, we need to add an equation upon deleting the top equation. We can take μ ˆ = 0 to 
get α ˆ = N −1 y ∗. . Then

ˆ μ 0 0 0 1×v y..  = θ ˆ = = = (A ′ A) − A ′ y, ˆ ( α ) ( N −1 y ∗. ) ( 0 v×1 N −1 ) ( y ∗. )

where (A ′ A) − =

0 01×v  ( 0 v×1 N−1 

)

is a g-inverse of A ′ A. The SSE in this case is~

~SSE = y y − A ′ ∑ ∑ yi j 2 y = y y − y N −1 y ∗. = − ∑ n i . i=1 j=1 i=1

Remark 1.3.8 Estimability can be quickly understood by solving Exercise1.2 and understanding the Gauss–Markov theorem in 
the next section.

1.4 Best Linear Unbiased Estimates

Let a ′ θ be an lpf in a Gauss–Markov model. By deﬁnition, it is nonestimable if it does not have a linear unbiased 
estimator. Suppose now that a ′ θ is an elpf. If it has two linear unbiased estimators c 1 ′ Y and c 2 ′ Y, then λc 1 ′ Y 
+ (1 − λ)c 2 ′ Y is also a linear unbiased estimator of a ′ θ for every real number λ and hence a ′ θ has inﬁnite number 
of linear unbiased estimators. Thus unbiasedness alone will not always get us a unique estimator for an elpf. Therefore, 
we have to impose a second criterion in the hope of getting a unique estimator. It turns out that the estimator having the 
minimum variance in the class of linear unbiased estimators is unique.

A linear function c ′ Y of Y is said to be the best linear unbiased estimator (blue) of an elpf a ′ θ if c ′ Y is unbiased 
for a ′ θ and has the least variance among all such linear unbiased estimators.

The following celebrated Gauss–Markov theorem claims that the blue exists for every elpf in any Gauss–Markov model.

Theorem 1.4.1 (Gauss–Markov Theorem) Let a ′ θ be an elpf in a Gauss–Markov ˆ ˆ model (Y, Aθ, σ 2 I). The blue of a ′ θ is 
a ′ θ where θ is a least squares estimate of θ, that is, a solution of the normal equation (1.3.2). The variance of the 
blue is a ′ (A ′ A) − aσ 2 , where (A ′ A) − is a g-inverse of A ′ A. The blue is unique.

Remark 1.4.2 As we have observed in Sect.1.3, when s = p, θ ˆ = (A ′ A) −1 A ′ y ˆ ˆ is unique and so is a ′ θ. When s < 
p also, a ′ θ remains the same no matter which solution of the normal equation (1.3.2) is used. Further, the variance a ′ 
(A ′ A) − aσ 2 also remains the same whatever be the g-inverse (A ′ A) − . To ˆ ˆ establish these facts, let θ and θ ∗ 
be two solutions of the normal equation (1.3.2). Since a ′ θ is estimable, by Remark1.2.4, there exists a vector d such 
that

A ′ Ad = a. Then a ′ θ ˆ − a ′ θ ∗ ˆ = d ′ A ′ A θ ˆ − θ ∗ ˆ ( A ′ y − A ′ y ) = 0. Let now = d′  ( )

(A ′ A) − and (A ′ A) + be two g-inverses of A ′ A so that A ′ A(A ′ A) ± A ′ A = A ′ A. Then a ′ (A ′ A) − a − a ′ (A 
′ A) + a = d ′ A ′ A ( (A ′ A) − − (A ′ A) + ) A ′ Ad = 0.

Proof of Theorem 1.4.1 Since a ′ θ is estimable, by Remark1.2.4, A ′ Ad = a for some vector d. Using this, we write a ′ θ 
ˆ = d ′ A ′ A θ ˆ = d ′ A ′ Y and E(a ′ ˆ θ(Y)) = E(d ′ A ′ Y) = d ′ A ′ Aθ = a ′ θ. Hence a ′ θ is a linear unbiased 
estimate. Let c ′ Y be an unbiased estimator of a ′ θ so that a = A ′ c. Its variance is V (c ′ Y) =

E ( c ′ Y − c ′ Aθ ) 2 = E ( c ′ (Y − Aθ)(Y − Aθ) ′ c ) = σ 2 c ′ c and hence V (a ′ ˆ θ(Y)) =~

 
      
