(afni[Title]) AND (("2000/01/01"[Date - Publication] : "3000"[Date - Publication]))
===================================================================================


1. Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2024 Aug 2;2:1-39. doi: 10.1162/imag_a_00246. 
eCollection 2024 Aug 1.

A Set of FMRI Quality Control Tools in AFNI: Systematic, in-depth, and 
interactive QC with afni_proc.py and more.

Taylor PA(1), Glen DR(1), Chen G(1), Cox RW(1), Hanayik T(2), Rorden C(3)(4), 
Nielson DM(5), Rajendra JK(1), Reynolds RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United 
States.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, FMRIB, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, United 
States.
(4)McCausland Center for Brain Imaging, University of South Carolina, Columbia, 
SC, United States.
(5)Machine Learning Team, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jun 11:2024.03.27.586976. doi: 10.1101/2024.03.27.586976.

Quality control (QC) assessment is a vital part of FMRI processing and analysis, 
and a typically underdiscussed aspect of reproducibility. This includes checking 
datasets at their very earliest stages (acquisition and conversion) through 
their processing steps (e.g., alignment and motion correction) to regression 
modeling (correct stimuli, no collinearity, valid fits, enough degrees of 
freedom, etc.) for each subject. There are a wide variety of features to verify 
throughout any single-subject processing pipeline, both quantitatively and 
qualitatively. We present several FMRI preprocessing QC features available in 
the AFNI toolbox, many of which are automatically generated by the 
pipeline-creation tool, afni_proc.py. These items include a modular HTML 
document that covers full single-subject processing from the raw data through 
statistical modeling, several review scripts in the results directory of 
processed data, and command line tools for identifying subjects with one or more 
quantitative properties across a group (such as triaging warnings, making 
exclusion criteria, or creating informational tables). The HTML itself contains 
several buttons that efficiently facilitate interactive investigations into the 
data, when deeper checks are needed beyond the systematic images. The pages are 
linkable, so that users can evaluate individual items across a group, for 
increased sensitivity to differences (e.g., in alignment or regression modeling 
images). Finally, the QC document contains rating buttons for each "QC block," 
as well as comment fields for each, to facilitate both saving and sharing the 
evaluations. This increases the specificity of QC, as well as its shareability, 
as these files can be shared with others and potentially uploaded into 
repositories, promoting transparency and open science. We describe the features 
and applications of these QC tools for FMRI.

© 2024 The Authors. Published under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International (CC BY 4.0) license.

DOI: 10.1162/imag_a_00246
PMCID: PMC11382598
PMID: 39257641

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


2. Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2024 Nov 12;2:1-52. doi: 10.1162/imag_a_00347. 
eCollection 2024 Nov 1.

Processing, evaluating, and understanding FMRI data with afni_proc.py.

Reynolds RC(1), Glen DR(1), Chen G(1), Saad ZS(1), Cox RW(1), Taylor PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Update of
    ArXiv. 2024 Aug 22:arXiv:2406.05248v3.

FMRI data are noisy, complicated to acquire, and typically go through many steps 
of processing before they are used in a study or clinical practice. Being able 
to visualize and understand the data from the start through the completion of 
processing, while being confident that each intermediate step was successful, is 
challenging. AFNI's afni_proc.py is a tool to create and run a processing 
pipeline for FMRI data. With its flexible features, afni_proc.py allows users to 
both control and evaluate their processing at a detailed level. It has been 
designed to keep users informed about all processing steps: it does not just 
process the data, but also first outputs a fully commented processing script 
that the users can read, query, interpret, and refer back to. Having this full 
provenance is important for being able to understand each step of processing; it 
also promotes transparency and reproducibility by keeping the record of 
individual-level processing and modeling specifics in a single, shareable place. 
Additionally, afni_proc.py creates pipelines that contain several automatic 
self-checks for potential problems during runtime. The output directory contains 
a dictionary of relevant quantities that can be programmatically queried for 
potential issues and a systematic, interactive quality control (QC) HTML. All of 
these features help users evaluate and understand their data and processing in 
detail. We describe these and other aspects of afni_proc.py here using a set of 
task-based and resting-state FMRI example commands.

DOI: 10.1162/imag_a_00347
PMCID: PMC11576932
PMID: 39575179

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


3. Brain Connect. 2017 Apr;7(3):152-171. doi: 10.1089/brain.2016.0475.

FMRI Clustering in AFNI: False-Positive Rates Redux.

Cox RW(1), Chen G(1), Glen DR(1), Reynolds RC(1), Taylor PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, NIMH/NIH/DHHS , Bethesda, 
Maryland.

Recent reports of inflated false-positive rates (FPRs) in FMRI group analysis 
tools by Eklund and associates in 2016 have become a large topic within (and 
outside) neuroimaging. They concluded that existing parametric methods for 
determining statistically significant clusters had greatly inflated FPRs ("up to 
70%," mainly due to the faulty assumption that the noise spatial autocorrelation 
function is Gaussian shaped and stationary), calling into question potentially 
"countless" previous results; in contrast, nonparametric methods, such as their 
approach, accurately reflected nominal 5% FPRs. They also stated that AFNI 
showed "particularly high" FPRs compared to other software, largely due to a bug 
in 3dClustSim. We comment on these points using their own results and figures 
and by repeating some of their simulations. Briefly, while parametric methods 
show some FPR inflation in those tests (and assumptions of Gaussian-shaped 
spatial smoothness also appear to be generally incorrect), their emphasis on 
reporting the single worst result from thousands of simulation cases greatly 
exaggerated the scale of the problem. Importantly, FPR statistics depends on 
"task" paradigm and voxelwise p value threshold; as such, we show how results of 
their study provide useful suggestions for FMRI study design and analysis, 
rather than simply a catastrophic downgrading of the field's earlier results. 
Regarding AFNI (which we maintain), 3dClustSim's bug effect was greatly 
overstated-their own results show that AFNI results were not "particularly" 
worse than others. We describe further updates in AFNI for characterizing 
spatial smoothness more appropriately (greatly reducing FPRs, although some 
remain >5%); in addition, we outline two newly implemented 
permutation/randomization-based approaches producing FPRs clustered much more 
tightly about 5% for voxelwise p ≤ 0.01.

DOI: 10.1089/brain.2016.0475
PMCID: PMC5399747
PMID: 28398812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.


4. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jun 11:2024.03.27.586976. doi: 
10.1101/2024.03.27.586976.

A Set of FMRI Quality Control Tools in AFNI: Systematic, in-depth and 
interactive QC with afni_proc.py and more.

Taylor PA(1), Glen DR(1), Chen G(1), Cox RW(1), Hanayik T(2), Rorden C(3)(4), 
Nielson DM(5), Rajendra JK(1), Reynolds RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, NIMH, NIH, USA.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, FMRIB, University of Oxford, 
UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, USA.
(4)McCausland Center for Brain Imaging, University of South Carolina, USA.
(5)Machine Learning Team, NIMH, NIH, USA.

Update in
    Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2024 Aug 02;2:1-39. doi: 10.1162/imag_a_00246.

Quality control (QC) assessment is a vital part of FMRI processing and analysis, 
and a typically under-discussed aspect of reproducibility. This includes 
checking datasets at their very earliest stages (acquisition and conversion) 
through their processing steps (e.g., alignment and motion correction) to 
regression modeling (correct stimuli, no collinearity, valid fits, enough 
degrees of freedom, etc.) for each subject. There are a wide variety of features 
to verify throughout any single subject processing pipeline, both quantitatively 
and qualitatively. We present several FMRI preprocessing QC features available 
in the AFNI toolbox, many of which are automatically generated by the 
pipeline-creation tool, afni_proc.py. These items include: a modular HTML 
document that covers full single subject processing from the raw data through 
statistical modeling; several review scripts in the results directory of 
processed data; and command line tools for identifying subjects with one or more 
quantitative properties across a group (such as triaging warnings, making 
exclusion criteria or creating informational tables). The HTML itself contains 
several buttons that efficiently facilitate interactive investigations into the 
data, when deeper checks are needed beyond the systematic images. The pages are 
linkable, so that users can evaluate individual items across a group, for 
increased sensitivity to differences (e.g., in alignment or regression modeling 
images). Finally, the QC document contains rating buttons for each "QC block", 
as well as comment fields for each, to facilitate both saving and sharing the 
evaluations. This increases the specificity of QC, as well as its shareability, 
as these files can be shared with others and potentially uploaded into 
repositories, promoting transparency and open science. We describe the features 
and applications of these QC tools for FMRI.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.03.27.586976
PMCID: PMC10996659
PMID: 38585923

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF COMPETING INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


5. Front Neurosci. 2023 Jan 30;16:1073800. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1073800. 
eCollection 2022.

Quality control practices in FMRI analysis: Philosophy, methods and examples 
using AFNI.

Reynolds RC(1), Taylor PA(1), Glen DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United 
States.

Quality control (QC) is a necessary, but often an under-appreciated, part of 
FMRI processing. Here we describe procedures for performing QC on acquired or 
publicly available FMRI datasets using the widely used AFNI software package. 
This work is part of the Research Topic, "Demonstrating Quality Control (QC) 
Procedures in fMRI." We used a sequential, hierarchical approach that contained 
the following major stages: (1) GTKYD (getting to know your data, esp. its basic 
acquisition properties), (2) APQUANT (examining quantifiable measures, with 
thresholds), (3) APQUAL (viewing qualitative images, graphs, and other 
information in systematic HTML reports) and (4) GUI (checking features 
interactively with a graphical user interface); and for task data, and (5) STIM 
(checking stimulus event timing statistics). We describe how these are 
complementary and reinforce each other to help researchers stay close to their 
data. We processed and evaluated the provided, publicly available resting state 
data collections (7 groups, 139 total subjects) and task-based data collection 
(1 group, 30 subjects). As specified within the Topic guidelines, each subject's 
dataset was placed into one of three categories: Include, exclude or uncertain. 
The main focus of this paper, however, is the detailed description of QC 
procedures: How to understand the contents of an FMRI dataset, to check its 
contents for appropriateness, to verify processing steps, and to examine 
potential quality issues. Scripts for the processing and analysis are freely 
available.

Copyright © 2023 Reynolds, Taylor and Glen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1073800
PMCID: PMC9922690
PMID: 36793774

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


6. ArXiv [Preprint]. 2024 Aug 22:arXiv:2406.05248v3.

Processing, evaluating and understanding FMRI data with afni_proc.py.

Reynolds RC(1), Glen DR(1), Chen G(1), Saad ZS(1), Cox RW(1), Taylor PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, NIH, Bethesda, USA.

Update in
    Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2024 Nov 12;2:1-52. doi: 10.1162/imag_a_00347.

FMRI data are noisy, complicated to acquire, and typically go through many steps 
of processing before they are used in a study or clinical practice. Being able 
to visualize and understand the data from the start through the completion of 
processing, while being confident that each intermediate step was successful, is 
challenging. AFNI's afni_proc.py is a tool to create and run a processing 
pipeline for FMRI data. With its flexible features, afni_proc.py allows users to 
both control and evaluate their processing at a detailed level. It has been 
designed to keep users informed about all processing steps: it does not just 
process the data, but first outputs a fully commented processing script that the 
users can read, query, interpret and refer back to. Having this full provenance 
is important for being able to understand each step of processing; it also 
promotes transparency and reproducibility by keeping the record of 
individual-level processing and modeling specifics in a single, shareable place. 
Additionally, afni_proc.py creates pipelines that contain several automatic 
self-checks for potential problems during runtime. The output directory contains 
a dictionary of relevant quantities that can be programmatically queried for 
potential issues and a systematic, interactive quality control (QC) HTML. All of 
these features help users evaluate and understand their data and processing in 
detail. We describe these and other aspects of afni_proc.py here using a set of 
task-based and resting state FMRI example commands.

PMCID: PMC11468194
PMID: 39398207


7. Hum Brain Mapp. 2006 May;27(5):417-24. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20247.

Functional imaging analysis contest (FIAC) analysis according to AFNI and SUMA.

Saad ZS(1), Chen G, Reynolds RC, Christidis PP, Hammett KR, Bellgowan PS, Cox 
RW.

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-1148, USA. ziad@nih.gov

The Functional Imaging Analysis Contest (FIAC) datasets were analyzed with the 
AFNI software package. Two types of linear regression analyses were carried out: 
"fixed shape" hemodynamic response, where a preselected incomplete gamma 
function is used to model each brief activation episode, and "variable shape" 
analysis, where the temporal shape of the response model in each stimulus block 
class is allowed to vary separately in each voxel. These time series regressions 
were carried out both in the volume and on the original data projected to 
individual standardized cortical surface models. Intersubject analyses were 
carried out voxel-wise on the regression amplitudes obtained from these time 
series results, using a multi-way within-subject analysis of variance (ANOVA). 
Group analysis of the block design demonstrated a significant repetition 
suppression of the BOLD signal within blocks in the superior and middle temporal 
gyrus. This effect may represent differences in the response to the first 
stimulus following a period of silence compared to the remaining sentences in 
the block. Analyzing the event-related data, Brodmann area 31 showed significant 
sentence effect and consecutive-sentence repetition effect. However, no 
significant speaker effect was found; these results may be consistent with the 
instructions to the subjects that they would be tested on the sentence content. 
Sentence by speaker interaction effects were found in bilateral middle temporal 
gyrus, left inferior frontal, and left inferior temporal gyrus.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20247
PMCID: PMC6871397
PMID: 16568421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Brain Connect. 2019 Sep;9(7):529-538. doi: 10.1089/brain.2019.0666.

Equitable Thresholding and Clustering: A Novel Method for Functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging Clustering in AFNI.

Cox RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

This article describes a hybrid method to threshold functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (FMRI) group statistical maps derived from voxel-wise 
second-level statistical analyses. The proposed "Equitable Thresholding and 
Clustering" (ETAC) approach seeks to reduce the dependence of clustering results 
on arbitrary parameter values by using multiple subtests, each equivalent to a 
standard FMRI clustering analysis, to make decisions about which groups of 
voxels are potentially significant. The union of these subtest results decides 
which voxels are accepted. The approach adjusts the cluster-thresholding 
parameter of each subtest in an equitable way, so that the individual 
false-positive rates (FPRs) are balanced across subtests to achieve a desired 
final FPR (e.g., 5%). ETAC utilizes resampling methods to estimate the FPR and 
thus does not rely on parametric assumptions about the spatial correlation of 
FMRI noise. The approach was validated with pseudotask timings in resting-state 
brain data. In addition, a task FMRI data collection was used to compare ETACs 
true positive detection power versus a standard cluster detection method, 
demonstrating that ETAC is able to detect true results and control false 
positives while reducing reliance on arbitrary analysis parameters.

DOI: 10.1089/brain.2019.0666
PMCID: PMC6727468
PMID: 31115252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.


9. Front Neuroinform. 2016 Jul 5;10:24. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2016.00024. eCollection 
2016.

Exploring fMRI Results Space: 31 Variants of an fMRI Analysis in AFNI, FSL, and 
SPM.

Pauli R(1), Bowring A(1), Reynolds R(2), Chen G(2), Nichols TE(3), Maumet C(1).

Author information:
(1)Warwick Manufacturing Group, University of Warwick Coventry, UK.
(2)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Warwick Manufacturing Group, University of WarwickCoventry, UK; Department of 
Statistics, University of WarwickCoventry, UK.

DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2016.00024
PMCID: PMC4932120
PMID: 27458367


10. Front Neuroinform. 2020 May 25;14:18. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2020.00018. eCollection 
2020.

Beware (Surprisingly Common) Left-Right Flips in Your MRI Data: An Efficient and 
Robust Method to Check MRI Dataset Consistency Using AFNI.

Glen DR(1), Taylor PA(1), Buchsbaum BR(2)(3), Cox RW(1), Reynolds RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, NIMH/NIH/DHHS, Bethesda, MD, 
United States.
(2)Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Knowing the difference between left and right is generally assumed throughout 
the brain MRI research community. However, we note widespread occurrences of 
left-right orientation errors in MRI open database repositories where volumes 
have contained systematic left-right flips between subject EPIs and anatomicals, 
due to having incorrect or missing file header information. Here we present a 
simple method in AFNI for determining the consistency of left and right within a 
pair of acquired volumes for a particular subject; the presence of 
EPI-anatomical inconsistency, for example, is a sign that dataset header 
information likely requires correction. The method contains both a quantitative 
evaluation as well as a visualizable verification. We test the functionality 
using publicly available datasets. Left-right flipping is not immediately 
obvious in most cases, so we also present visualization methods for looking at 
this problem (and other potential problems), using examples from both FMRI and 
DTI datasets.

Copyright © 2020 Glen, Taylor, Buchsbaum, Cox and Reynolds.

DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2020.00018
PMCID: PMC7263312
PMID: 32528270


11. Neuroimage. 2012 Aug 15;62(2):743-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.056. Epub 
2011 Aug 27.

AFNI: what a long strange trip it's been.

Cox RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific and Statistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental 
Health, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, 
10 Center Dr. Room 1D80, Bethesda, MD 20892-1148, USA. robertcox@mail.nih.gov

AFNI is an open source software package for the analysis and display of 
functional MRI data. It originated in 1994 to meet the specific needs of 
researchers at the Medical College of Wisconsin, in particular the mapping of 
activation maps to Talairach-Tournoux space, but has been expanded steadily 
since then into a wide-ranging set of tool for FMRI data analyses. AFNI was the 
first platform for real-time 3D functional activation and registration 
calculations. One of AFNI's main strengths is its flexibility and transparency. 
In recent years, significant efforts have been made to increase the 
user-friendliness of AFNI's FMRI processing stream, with the introduction of 
"super-scripts" to setup the entire analysis, and graphical front-ends for these 
managers.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.056
PMCID: PMC3246532
PMID: 21889996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
