1. Probability Spaces
=====================

* Probability theory is the branch of mathematics that is concerned with random (or chance) phenomena.

* Many phenomena have the property that their repeated observation under a specified set of conditios invariably leads to the same outcome.

* A familiar example of this type is the tossing of a coing.

a seemingly erratic and unpredictable manner

to make any worthwhile statements

* Experience has shown that many nondeterministic phenomena exhibit a statistical regularity that makes them subject to study.

* This may be illustrated by considering coin tossing again.

* It appears as if the proportion of heads in n tosses would converge to p if we let n approach infinity.

* We thing of this limiting proportion p as the "probability" that the coin will land heads up in a single toss.

* More generally the statement that a certain experimental outcome has probability p can be interpreted as meaning that if
the experiment is repeated a large number of times, that outcome would be observed "about" 100p percent of the time.

* this interpretation of probabilities is called the relative frequency interpretation,

* we will use the relative frequency interpretation of probabilities only as an intuitive motivation for the definitions and
theorems we will be developing throuhout the book.

**1.1 Examples of random phenomena**

Example 1. A box has s balls, labeled 1, 2, ..., s but otherwise indentical. Consider the following
experiment. The balls are mixed up well in the box and a person reaches into the box and draws a ball. The 
number of the ball is noted and the ball is returned to the box. The outcome of the experiment is the number on the ball selected. About
this experiment we can make no nontrivial prediction.

* trials - repeticion del experimento

* As the number of trials gets large we woould expect the relative frequencies :math:`N_n(1)/n, ..., N_n(s)/n``to settle down to some 
fixed numbers
:math:`p_1, p_2, ...,p_s` (which according to our intuition in this case should all be 1/s)

* We will now make a mathematical model of the experiment of drawing a ball from the box. To do this, we first a set :math:`\Omega`having 
s points that we place into one-to-one correspondence with the possible outcomes
of the experiment. In this correspondence exactly one of :math:`\Omega` will be associated with the outcome that the ball labeled k is
selected. Call that point :math:`w_k`. To the point :math:`w_k` we associate the number :math:`p_k=1/s` and call it the
probability of :math:`w_k`. We observe at once that :math:`0 \leq p_k \leq 1` and that :math:`p_1 + ... + p_s = 1`

* Suppose now that in addition to being numbered from 1 to s the first r balls are colored red and the remaining s-r are colored black.
 
* A moment's thought shows that the relative frequency of red balls drawn among n repetitions of the experiment is just the sum of 
therelative frequencies :math:`N_n(k)/n` over those of k that correspond of a red ball.

* Let us see how we can reflect this fact in our model. Let A be the subset of :math:`\Omega` consisting of those points :math:`w_k`
such that ball k is red. The A has exactly r points. We call A an **event**. 

* To say the event A occurs means that the outcome of the experiment is represented by some point in A.

**Definition 2** A probability measure P on a :math:`\sigma`-field of subsets :math:`\mathscr{A}` of a set :math:`\Omega` is a real-valued
function having domain :math:`\mathscr{A}` satisfying the following properties:

(i) :math:`P(\Omega)=1`

(ii) :math:`P(A) \geq 0` for all :math:`A \in \mathscr{A}`

(iii) If :math:`A_n` n=1,2,3,..., are mutually disjoint sets in :math:`\mathscr{A}`, then

.. math::

   P(\cap_{n=1}^{\infty} A_n) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} P(A_n)


A probability space, denoted by :math:`(\Omega, \mathscr{A}, P)`, is a set :math:`\Omega`, a :math:`\sigma`-field of subsets 
:math:`\mathscr{A}`, and a probability measure P defined on :math:`\mathscr{A}`.

- isotpe desintegration experiment

- whatever

**1.3 Properties of probabilities**

We assume that we are given somw probability space :math:`(\Omega, \mathscr{A}, P)` and that all sets under are events, i.e.
members of :math:`\mathscr{A}`.

For any set A, :math:`A \cap A^c = \Omega` and thus for any two sets A and B we have the decomposition of B.

1) :math:`B = \Omega \cap B = (A \cup A^c) \cap B = (A \cap B) \cup (A^c \cap B)`

2) :math:`P(B) = P(A \cap B) + P(A^c \cap B)`

3) By setting :math:`B = \Omega``and recalling that :math:`P(\Omega) = 1`, then :math:`P(A^c)=1-P(A)`

4) In particular :math:`P(\O) = 1 - P(\Omega)`, so that :math:`P(\O) = 0`

5) Suppose that :math:`A \subset B`. Then :math:`A \cap B = A``, then :math:`P(B) = P(A) + P(A^c \cap B)` and :math:`P(B) \geq 
P(A)`

6) :math:`P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B)`

7) :math:`P(A \cup B) \geq   P(A) + P(B)`


**1.4 Conditional probability**

- If the ball drawn frm the box is known to be red, what is the probability that it was the red ball labeled 1?

**Definition 3** 





