(dynamic systems[Title]) AND (("2000/01/01"[Date - Publication] : "3000"[Date - Publication]))
==============================================================================================

1. Genome Biol. 2012 Jan 30;13(1):312. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-312.

**Dynamic systems.**

Bakal C(1).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK. 
cbakal@icr.ac.uk

A report of the Wellcome Trust Functional Genomics and Systems Biology 
Conference, Hinxton, UK, 29 November to 1 December 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-312
PMCID: PMC3334580
PMID: 22289510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Orthopade. 2010 Jun;39(6):549-50. doi: 10.1007/s00132-009-1584-6.

[Dorsal dynamic systems].

[Article in German]

Rauschmann M(1), Richolt J.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Wirbelsäulenorthopädie, Orthopädische Universitätsklinik 
Friedrichsheim gGmbH, Marienburgstrasse 2, 60528, Frankfurt/Main, Deutschland. 
m.rauschmann@friedrichsheim.de

DOI: 10.1007/s00132-009-1584-6
PMID: 20449564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Entropy (Basel). 2023 Jul 17;25(7):1070. doi: 10.3390/e25071070.

**Comparison of Bootstrap Methods for Estimating Causality in Linear Dynamic 
Systems: A Review.**

Miwakeichi F(1)(2), Galka A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistical Modeling, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 
Tokyo 190-8562, Japan.
(2)Statistical Science Program, Graduate Institute for Advanced Studies, 
SOKENDAI, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan.
(3)Clinic for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine II, University Clinic, 
University of Kiel, 24105 Kiel, Germany.

In this study, we present a thorough comparison of the performance of four 
different bootstrap methods for assessing the significance of causal analysis in 
time series data. For this purpose, multivariate simulated data are generated by 
a linear feedback system. The methods investigated are uncorrelated Phase 
Randomization Bootstrap (uPRB), which generates surrogate data with no 
cross-correlation between variables by randomizing the phase in the frequency 
domain; Time Shift Bootstrap (TSB), which generates surrogate data by 
randomizing the phase in the time domain; Stationary Bootstrap (SB), which 
calculates standard errors and constructs confidence regions for weakly 
dependent stationary observations; and AR-Sieve Bootstrap (ARSB), a resampling 
method based on AutoRegressive (AR) models that approximates the underlying 
data-generating process. The uPRB method accurately identifies variable 
interactions but fails to detect self-feedback in some variables. The TSB 
method, despite performing worse than uPRB, is unable to detect feedback between 
certain variables. The SB method gives consistent causality results, although 
its ability to detect self-feedback decreases, as the mean block width 
increases. The ARSB method shows superior performance, accurately detecting both 
self-feedback and causality across all variables. Regarding the analysis of the 
Impulse Response Function (IRF), only the ARSB method succeeds in detecting both 
self-feedback and causality in all variables, aligning well with the 
connectivity diagram. Other methods, however, show considerable variations in 
detection performance, with some detecting false positives and others only 
detecting self-feedback.

DOI: 10.3390/e25071070
PMCID: PMC10378223
PMID: 37510017

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Hum Dev. 2020 Jan;63(3-4):153-179. doi: 10.1159/000503825. Epub 2019 Nov 27.

Dynamic Systems, Process and Development.

van Geert PLC(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

In this article, I answer the questions from Witherington and Boom's 
introduction to this special issue in the form of an imaginary interview, led by 
David Boom, equally imaginary editor of The Processual Inquirer, an obscure but 
interesting journal that appears in imaginary physical print only, and which, as 
a consequence, has so far left no traces on the Internet….

Copyright © 2019 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000503825
PMCID: PMC7050700
PMID: 32139922


5. Sensors (Basel). 2020 Jul 17;20(14):3975. doi: 10.3390/s20143975.

A Dynamic Systems Approach for Detecting and Localizing of Infarct-Related 
Artery in Acute Myocardial Infarction Using Compressed Paper-Based 
Electrocardiogram (ECG).

Le TQ(1), Chandra V(2), Afrin K(2), Srivatsa S(3), Bukkapatnam S(2).

Author information:
(1)Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, North Dakota State University, 
Fargo, ND 58102, USA.
(2)Industrial and Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 
77843, USA.
(3)Heart Artery and Vein Center of Fresno, Fresno, CA 93722, USA.

Timely evaluation and reperfusion have improved the myocardial salvage and the 
subsequent recovery rate of the patients hospitalized with acute myocardial 
infarction (MI). Long waiting time and time-consuming procedures of in-hospital 
diagnostic testing severely affect the timeliness. We present a Poincare pattern 
ensemble-based method with the consideration of multi-correlated non-stationary 
stochastic system dynamics to localize the infarct-related artery (IRA) in acute 
MI by fully harnessing information from paper-based Electrocardiogram (ECG). The 
vectorcardiogram (VCG) diagnostic features extracted from only 2.5-s long paper 
ECG recordings were used to hierarchically localize the IRA-not mere 
localization of the infarcted cardiac tissues-in acute MI. Paper ECG records and 
angiograms of 106 acute MI patients collected at the Heart Artery and Vein 
Center at Fresno California and the 12-lead ECG signals from the Physionet PTB 
online database were employed to validate the proposed approach. We reported the 
overall accuracies of 97.41% for healthy control (HC) vs. MI, 89.41 ± 9.89 for 
left and right culprit arteries vs. others, 88.2 ± 11.6 for left main arteries 
vs. right-coronary-ascending (RCA) and 93.67 ± 4.89 for left-anterior-descending 
(LAD) vs. left-circumflex (LCX). The IRA localization from paper ECG can be used 
to timely triage the patients with acute coronary syndromes to the percutaneous 
coronary intervention facilities.

DOI: 10.3390/s20143975
PMCID: PMC7412042
PMID: 32708959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. Psychother Res. 2024 Jul;34(6):828-844. doi: 10.1080/10503307.2023.2252169. Epub 
2023 Aug 31.

Applying dynamic systems theory and complexity theory methods in psychotherapy 
research: A systematic literature review.

Klocek A(1), Premus J(2), Řiháček T(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Social Studies, Psychology Research Institute, Masaryk University, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Université Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(3)Faculty of Social Studies, Department of Psychology, Masaryk University, 
Brno, Czech Republic.

OBJECTIVE: Dynamic systems theory and complexity theory (DST/CT) is a framework 
explaining how complex systems change and adapt over time. In psychotherapy, 
DST/CT can be used to understand how a person's mental and emotional state 
changes during therapy incorporating higher levels of complexity. This study 
aimed to systematically review the variability of DST/CT methods applied in 
psychotherapy research.
METHODS: A primary studies search was conducted in the EBSCO and Web of 
Knowledge databases, extracting information about the analyzed DST/CT phenomena, 
employed mathematical methods to investigate these phenomena, descriptions of 
specified dynamic models, psychotherapy phenomena, and other information 
regarding studies with empirical data (e.g., measurement granularity).
RESULTS: After screening 38,216 abstracts and 4,194 full texts, N = 41 studies 
published from 1990 to 2021 were identified. The employed methods typically 
included measures of dynamic complexity or chaoticity. Computational and 
simulation studies most often employed first-order ordinary differential 
equations and typically focused on describing the time evolution of 
client-therapist dyadic influences. Eligible studies with empirical data were 
usually based on case studies and focused on data with high time intensity of 
within-session dynamics.
CONCLUSION: This review provides a descriptive synthesis of the current state of 
the proliferation of DST/CT methods in the psychotherapy research field.

DOI: 10.1080/10503307.2023.2252169
PMID: 37652751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Behav Neurosci. 2016 Jun 10;10:107. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00107. 
eCollection 2016.

Waddington, Dynamic Systems, and Epigenetics.

Tronick E(1), Hunter RG(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts Boston, 
Psychology Boston, MA, USA.

Waddington coined the term "epigenetic" to attempt to explain the complex, 
dynamic interactions between the developmental environment and the genome that 
led to the production of phenotype. Waddington's thoughts on the importance of 
both adaptability and canalization of phenotypic development are worth recalling 
as well, as they emphasize the available range for epigenetic action and the 
importance of environmental feedback (or lack thereof) in the development of 
complex traits. We suggest that a dynamic systems view fits well with 
Waddington's conception of epigenetics in the developmental context, as well as 
shedding light on the study of the molecular epigenetic effects of the 
environment on brain and behavior. Further, the dynamic systems view emphasizes 
the importance of the multi-directional interchange between the organism, the 
genome and various aspects of the environment to the ultimate phenotype.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00107
PMCID: PMC4901045
PMID: 27375447


8. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2019 Nov;30(11):3370-3383. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2891257. Epub 2019 Jan 31.

Multistep Prediction of Dynamic Systems With Recurrent Neural Networks.

Mohajerin N, Waslander SL.

In this paper, we address the state initialization problem in recurrent neural 
networks (RNNs), which seeks proper values for the RNN initial states at the 
beginning of a prediction interval. The proposed methods employ various forms of 
neural networks (NNs) to generate proper initial state values for RNNs. A 
variety of RNNs are trained using the proposed NN initialization schemes for 
modeling two aerial vehicles, a helicopter and a quadrotor, from experimental 
data. It is shown that the RNN initialized by the NN-based initialization method 
outperforms the washout method which is commonly used to initialize RNNs. 
Furthermore, a comprehensive study of RNNs trained for multistep prediction of 
the two aerial vehicles is presented. The multistep prediction of the quadrotor 
is enhanced using a hybrid model, which combines a simplified physics-based 
motion model of the vehicle with RNNs. While the maximum translational and 
rotational velocities in the Quadrotor data set are about 4 m/s and 3.8 rad/s, 
respectively, the hybrid model produces predictions, over 1.9 s, which remain 
within 9 cm/s and 0.12 rad/s of the measured translational and rotational 
velocities, with 99% confidence on the test data set.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2891257
PMID: 30714932


9. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 13;14(1):27903. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-79279-1.

Multilevel modeling and control of dynamic systems.

Erofeeva V(1), Granichin O(2), Avros R(3), Volkovich Z(3).

Author information:
(1)St. Petersburg State University, 7-9 Universitetskaya Embankment, St. 
Petersburg, 199034, Russia. v.erofeeva@spbu.ru.
(2)St. Petersburg State University, 7-9 Universitetskaya Embankment, St. 
Petersburg, 199034, Russia.
(3)Software Engineering Department, Braude College of Engineering, Karmiel, 
Israel.

The underlying changes of complex dynamic systems are affected by numerous 
highly interdependent components with nonlinear interactions and cannot be 
suitably predicted by merely analyzing their individual parts. Recent 
technological developments (reducing the size of actuators and sensors, 
increasing speed and productivity) make it possible to monitor and handle 
systems on time, even during transient processes. In many practical 
applications, to effectively study rapidly evolving systems, their structure has 
to be examined at three levels: Micro-Scale (Short-Term), Meso-Scale 
(Intermediate-Term), and Macro-Scale (Long-Term). This multiscale framework 
provides a powerful tool for understanding and managing the intricate dynamics 
of complex systems. Macro-scale and micro-scale approaches are conventionally 
utilized in general system modeling and control theory, especially within the 
fields of networked control and multi-agent systems. By leveraging the 
meso-scale perspective, it is possible to balance detailed component analysis 
with overarching system behaviors, thereby enhancing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of operational strategies in complex systems. This paper presents 
and discusses a formal meso-level depiction of dynamics and control, assuming a 
finite number of attractors form and remain stable over time progress. Integral 
characteristics and dynamics of clusters are defined, simplifying control 
synthesis while maintaining problem formulation. A significant challenge is the 
model error due to changing cluster structures linked to randomized estimation 
and optimization algorithms valid under unknown disturbances. To demonstrate the 
practicality of this framework, the approach is applied to control tasks of a 
group of robots, leading to scalable and effective control strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-79279-1
PMCID: PMC11560967
PMID: 39537740

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests.


10. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2002 Dec;23 Suppl 4:15-22.

Dynamic systems and inferential information processing in human communication.

Grammer K(1), Fink B, Renninger L.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institute for Urban Ethology, Vienna, Austria. 
karl.grammer@univie.ac.at

Research in human communication on an ethological basis is almost obsolete. The 
reasons for this are manifold and lie partially in methodological problems 
connected to the observation and description of behavior, as well as the nature 
of human behavior itself. In this chapter, we present a new, non-intrusive, 
technical approach to the analysis of human non-verbal behavior, which could 
help to solve the problem of categorization that plagues the traditional 
approaches. We utilize evolutionary theory to propose a new theory-driven 
methodological approach to the 'multi-unit multi-channel modulation' problem of 
human nonverbal communication. Within this concept, communication is seen as 
context-dependent (the meaning of a signal is adapted to the situation), as a 
multi-channel and a multi-unit process (a string of many events interrelated in 
'communicative' space and time), and as related to the function it serves. Such 
an approach can be utilized to successfully bridge the gap between evolutionary 
psychological research, which focuses on social cognition adaptations, and human 
ethology, which describes every day behavior in an objective, systematic way.

PMID: 12496731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Org Biomol Chem. 2023 Aug 30;21(34):6956-6968. doi: 10.1039/d3ob00668a.

Hemiacetal-based dynamic systems: a new mechanistic insight.

Coufal R(1)(2), Tošner Z(3), Drahoňovský D(4), Vohlídal J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science, 
Charles University, Hlavova 8/2030, 128 40 Prague 2, Czech Republic. 
radek.coufal@tul.cz.
(2)Department of Science and Research, Faculty of Health Studies, Technical 
University of Liberec, Studentská 1402/2, 461 17 Liberec 1, Czech Republic.
(3)NMR Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Hlavova 8/2030, 128 
40 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, 
Hlavova 8/2030, 128 40 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

The formation of hemiacetals from pyrazine trifluoromethylketone as a model 
receptor and four simple alcohols was studied by using quantum chemical 
calculations and NMR spectroscopy. Free energy profiles for four types of 
mechanistic pathways were calculated and discussed with respect to kinetic and 
thermodynamic measurements. We show that hemiacetal formation is facilitated by 
an assisted proton transfer process via a pseudo eight-membered transition state 
which brings the theory and experiment into close agreement. Also, a newly 
proposed mechanistic pathway for hemiacetal formation via a five-membered 
transition state leading to zwitterionic intermediates is discussed. Direct 
proton transfer in a pseudo four-membered transition state can be ruled out due 
to the high energy of transition states with respect to other mechanistic 
pathways. We also show that in the case of hemiacetals, water and alcohol 
molecules cannot account sufficiently for the H-transfer process via 
six-membered transition states.

DOI: 10.1039/d3ob00668a
PMID: 37581612


12. Small Sci. 2021 Sep 28;2(1):2100049. doi: 10.1002/smsc.202100049. eCollection 
2022 Jan.

Nonlinearity in Memristors for Neuromorphic Dynamic Systems.

Yang K(1), Joshua Yang J(2), Huang R(1)(3)(4), Yang Y(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Micro/nanoelectronics Peking University Beijing 100871 China.
(2)Electrical and Computer Engineering Department University of Southern 
California Los Angeles CA 90089 USA.
(3)Center for Brain Inspired Chips Institute for Artificial Intelligence Peking 
University Beijing 100871 China.
(4)Center for Brain Inspired Intelligence Chinese Institute for Brain Research 
(CIBR) Beijing 102206 China.

As semiconductor technology enters the more than Moore era, there exists an 
apparent contradiction between the rapidly growing demands for data processing 
and the visible inefficiency rooted in traditional computing architecture. 
Neuromorphic systems hold great prospects in enabling a new generation of 
computing paradigm that can address this issue, which demands device components 
with rich dynamics and nonlinearity. Herein, the nonlinearity in memristive 
devices and their application in building neuromorphic dynamic systems are 
reviewed. The internal mechanisms that endow memristive devices with 
nonlinearity and rich dynamics are reviewed and subsequently the nonlinear 
spiking neurons that are implemented utilizing the physical processes in 
memristors are shown. Typical examples on neuromorphic dynamic systems based on 
nonlinear memristors are summarized, including memristive reservoir, memristive 
oscillatory neural network, and memristive chaotic computing. Finally, an 
outlook in the development of neuromorphic dynamic systems is given.

© 2021 The Authors. Small Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/smsc.202100049
PMCID: PMC11936018
PMID: 40212323

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


13. Measurement (Lond). 2021 Feb;169:108432. doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108432. 
Epub 2020 Sep 17.

Accessing Covid19 epidemic outbreak in Tamilnadu and the impact of lockdown 
through epidemiological models and dynamic systems.

Rajendran S(1), Jayagopal P(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Scholar, School of Information Technology and Engineering, Vellore 
Institute of Technology, Vellore, India.
(2)Associate Professor, Department of Software & Systems Engineering, School of 
Information Technology and Engineering Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 
India.

Despite having a small footprint origin, COVID-19 has expanded its clutches to 
being a global pandemic with severe consequences threatening the survival of the 
human species. Despite international communities closing their corridors to 
reduce the exponential spread of the coronavirus. The need to study the patterns 
of transmission and spread gains utmost importance at the grass-root level of 
the social structure. To determine the impact of lockdown and social distancing 
in Tamilnadu through epidemiological models in forecasting the "effective 
reproductive number" (R0) determining the significance in transmission rate in 
Tamilnadu after first Covid19 case confirmation on March 07, 2020. Utilizing web 
scraping techniques to extract data from different online sources to determine 
the probable transmission rate in Tamilnadu from the rest of the Indian states. 
Comparing the different epidemiological models (SIR, SIER) in forecasting and 
assessing the current and future spread of COVID-19. R0 value has a high spike 
in densely populated districts with the probable flattening of the curve due to 
lockdown and the rapid rise after the relaxation of lockdown. As of June 03, 
2020, there were 25,872 confirmed cases and 208 deaths in Tamilnadu after two 
and a half months of lockdown with minimal exceptions. As on June 03, 2020, the 
information published online by the Tamilnadu state government the fatality is 
at 1.8% (208/11345 = 1.8%) spread with those aged (0-12) at 1437 and 13-60 at 
21,899 and 60+ at 2536 the risk of symptomatic infection increases with age and 
comorbid conditions.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108432
PMCID: PMC7494487
PMID: 32958973

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


14. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2025 Feb 24;64(9):e202422963. doi: 
10.1002/anie.202422963. Epub 2025 Jan 31.

Photoacids and Photobases: Applications in Functional Dynamic Systems.

Yucknovsky A(1)(2), Amdursky N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa, 3200003, Israel.
(2)Chemistry Research Laboratory, University of Oxford, 12 Mansfield Road, 
Oxford, OX1 3TA.
(3)Chemistry, School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, S3 7HF, United Kingdom.

Brønsted photoacids and photobases are a unique class of molecules that undergo 
a major change in their pKa values between their ground and excited states, 
resulting in donating or accepting a proton, respectively, but only after light 
excitation. This property of photoacids/photobases makes them an attractive tool 
for light-gating various dynamic processes. Here, we review the use of this 
property to manipulate functional dynamic systems with light. We discuss how a 
proton transfer event that can happen upon light excitation from a photoacid to 
a chemical moiety of a certain system or, vice versa, from the system to a 
photobase, can result in a shift in the equilibrium of the system, resulting in 
some dynamicity. We detail various systems, including self-assembly processes of 
nanostructures, self-propulsion of droplets, catalysis for hydrogen evolution or 
CO2 capturing, nanotechnological devices based on enzymatic processes, and 
changes in proton-conducting ionophores and materials. We detail the basic 
guidelines for using Brønsted photoacids and photobases in a desired system and 
conclude with the current technological gaps in further using these molecules.

© 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by 
Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.202422963
PMCID: PMC11848990
PMID: 39888194

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Oct 3;120(40):e2216656120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2216656120. Epub 2023 Sep 26.

Progress in modeling dynamic systems for sustainable development.

Selin NE(1)(2), Giang A(3)(4), Clark WC(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(2)Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(3)Institute for Resources, Environment and Sustainability, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(5)John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
02138.

This Perspective evaluates recent progress in modeling nature-society systems to 
inform sustainable development. We argue that recent work has begun to address 
longstanding and often-cited challenges in bringing modeling to bear on problems 
of sustainable development. For each of four stages of modeling 
practice-defining purpose, selecting components, analyzing interactions, and 
assessing interventions-we highlight examples of dynamical modeling methods and 
advances in their application that have improved understanding and begun to 
inform action. Because many of these methods and associated advances have 
focused on particular sectors and places, their potential to inform key open 
questions in the field of sustainability science is often underappreciated. We 
discuss how application of such methods helps researchers interested in 
harnessing insights into specific sectors and locations to address human 
well-being, focus on sustainability-relevant timescales, and attend to power 
differentials among actors. In parallel, application of these modeling methods 
is helping to advance theory of nature-society systems by enhancing the uptake 
and utility of frameworks, clarifying key concepts through more rigorous 
definitions, and informing development of archetypes that can assist hypothesis 
development and testing. We conclude by suggesting ways to further leverage 
emerging modeling methods in the context of sustainability science.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2216656120
PMCID: PMC10556647
PMID: 37751553

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


16. Methods Enzymol. 2022;677:263-290. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2022.08.010. Epub 2022 
Sep 26.

Time-resolved small-angle neutron scattering (TR-SANS) for structural biology of 
dynamic systems: Principles, recent developments, and practical guidelines.

Martel A(1), Gabel F(2).

Author information:
(1)Large Scale Structures Group, Institut Laue-Langevin, Grenoble, France.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, CNRS, IBS, Grenoble, France. Electronic address: 
frank.gabel@ibs.fr.

We present an overview of time-resolved small-angle neutron scattering (TR-SANS) 
applied to biological systems, with a focus on bio-macromolecules and assemblies 
they form, together with practical guidelines. After a brief introduction to the 
theory and practice of SANS, we present the general setup and specifics of 
time-resolved experiments, as well as an overview of diverse experimental 
results and applications from the past ≈25years. Subsequently, we provide 
guidelines and practical instructions for the design, planning and execution for 
TR-SANS experiments, as a function of the time- and length-scales of the 
biological processes of interest, the availability of sample amount and 
deuterium labeling, and the structural information sought. We conclude with a 
discussion of the most recent instrumental and sample environment developments 
and perspectives for the future.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2022.08.010
PMID: 36410952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2006 Aug;16(4):420-8. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.06.011. Epub 
2006 Jul 13.

Gustatory processing: a dynamic systems approach.

Jones LM(1), Fontanini A, Katz DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.

Recent gustatory studies have provided a growing body of evidence that taste 
processing is dynamic and distributed, and the taste system too complex to be 
adequately described by traditional feed-forward models of taste coding. Current 
research demonstrates that neuronal responses throughout the gustatory neuroaxis 
are broad, variable and temporally structured, as a result of the fact that the 
taste network is extensive and heavily interconnected, containing modulatory 
pathways, many of which are reciprocal. Multimodal influences (e.g. olfactory 
and somatosensory) and effects of internal state (e.g. attention and 
expectation), shown in both behavioral and neuronal responses to taste stimuli, 
add further complexity to neural taste responses. Future gustatory research 
should extend to more brain regions, incorporate more connections, and analyze 
behaviors and neuronal responses in both time- and state-dependent manners.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2006.06.011
PMID: 16842991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Medicina (Kaunas). 2010;46(6):374-81.

A dynamic systems approach to bimanual coordination in stroke: implications for 
rehabilitation and research.

Sleimen-Malkoun R(1), Temprado JJ, Berton E.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences du Mouvement E. J. Marey, Faculté des Sciences du 
Sport, 163 Avenue de Luminy, BP 910, 13288 Marseille, France.

During the last 30 years, the dynamic systems approach to coordination patterns 
contributed to shed new lights on the principles governing interlimb 
coordination, its dynamics, and its neural basis, predominantly in healthy 
people. In the present paper, we aim to show how these concepts could provide a 
theoretical and a methodological framework to address bimanual coordination 
dysfunction and rehabilitation in stroke patients. Compared to conventional 
approaches to research and rehabilitation in stroke, the one proposed in this 
paper is original since it seeks to assess and improve the impaired limb through 
(and in) coordination tasks. We concretely envisage a number of implications of 
the "dynamic systems" view to understand the behavioral consequences of 
intrinsic asymmetries (due to central nervous system injury) on bimanual 
dynamics in stroke and to identify how to exploit the central nervous system 
plasticity and self-organizing properties for recovering more adaptive 
coordinated movements. We conclude that more interest should be accorded to 
bimanual coordination assessment and rehabilitation in stroke. In this respect, 
the dynamical systems approach provides interesting insights and valuable tools. 
Experimental and clinical studies are still needed in order to elaborate firm 
and founded guidelines for therapy.

PMID: 20944445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Child Dev. 2023 Sep-Oct;94(5):1340-1355. doi: 10.1111/cdev.13931. Epub 2023 Apr 
26.

Children's hypothetical reasoning about complex and dynamic systems.

Nyhout A(1)(2), Sweatman H(3), Ganea PA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.
(2)Department of Applied Psychology & Human Development, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada.

Children's hypothetical reasoning about a complex and dynamic causal system was 
investigated. Predominantly White, middle-class 5- to 7-year-old children from 
the Greater Toronto Area learned about novel food chains and were asked to 
consider the effects of removing one species on the others. In Study 1 (N = 72; 
36 females, 36 males; 2018), 7-year-olds answered questions about both direct 
and indirect effects with a high degree of accuracy, whereas 5-year-olds 
performed at chance. Six-year-olds showed intermediate performance. Using food 
chains with clearer constraints, Study 2 (N = 72; 35 females, 37 males; 
2020-2021) replicated these findings. These results indicate that the ability to 
think about hypothetical changes to dynamic causal systems develops between 5 
and 7 years. Implications for science education are discussed.

© 2023 The Authors. Child Development published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Society for Research in Child Development.

DOI: 10.1111/cdev.13931
PMID: 37186293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci. 2019 Jan;23(1):79-112.

A Nonlinear Dynamic Systems Model of Psychotherapy: First Steps Toward 
Validation and the Role of External Input.

Scholler H(1), Viol K(1), Goditsch H(1), Aichhorn W(1), Hutt MT(2), Schiepek 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Jacobs University Bremen, Germany.

Mathematical modeling and computer simulations are important means to understand 
the mechanisms of psychotherapy. The challenge is to design models which not 
only predict outcome, but simulate the nonlinear trajectories of change. Another 
challenge is to validate them with empirical data. We proposed a model on change 
dynamics which integrates five variables (order parameters) (therapeutic 
progress or success, motivation for change, problem severity, emotions, and 
insight) and four control parameters (capacity to enter a trustful cooperation 
and working alliance, cognitive competencies and mindfulness, hopefulness, 
behavioral resources). The control parameters modulate the nonlinear functions 
interrelating the variables. The evolution dynamics of the system is determined 
by a set of nine nonlinear difference equations, one for each variable and 
parameter. Here we outline how the model can be tested and validated by 
empirical time series data of the variables, by time series of the therapeutic 
alliance, and by assessing the input onto the system as it is perceived by the 
client. The parameters are measured by questionnaires at the beginning and at 
the end of the treatment. A key element of the validation algorithm is the 
adjustment of the parameter values as assessed by the questionnaires to 
model-specific parameter values by which the dynamics can be reproduced 
(calibration). The validation steps are illustrated by the data of a client who 
used an internet-based tool for high-frequency therapy monitoring (daily 
self-ratings). Especially after applying the input vector (interventions as 
experienced by the client) the similarity between the empirical and the model 
dynamics becomes evident. The averaged correlation between the empirical and the 
simulated dynamics across all variables is .41, after applying a short averaging 
mean window and eliminating an initial transient period, it is .62, varying 
between .47 and .81, depending on the variable. The discussion opens 
perspectives on the combination of mathematical modeling with real-time 
monitoring in order to realize data-driven simulations for short-term 
predictions and to estimate the effects of interventions before real 
interventions are applied.

PMID: 30557137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Aug 9;22(16):5935. doi: 10.3390/s22165935.

Deep Learning for Robust Adaptive Inverse Control of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems: 
Improved Settling Time with an Autoencoder.

Alwan NAS(1), Hussain ZM(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Engineering, University of Baghdad, Baghdad 10017, Iraq.
(2)School of Engineering, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, WA 6027, Australia.

An adaptive deep neural network is used in an inverse system identification 
setting to approximate the inverse of a nonlinear plant with the aim of 
constituting the plant controller by copying to the latter the weights and 
architecture of the converging deep neural network. This deep learning (DL) 
approach to the adaptive inverse control (AIC) problem is shown to outperform 
the adaptive filtering techniques and algorithms normally used in adaptive 
control, especially when in nonlinear plants. The deeper the controller, the 
better the inverse function approximation, provided that the nonlinear plant has 
an inverse and that this inverse can be approximated. Simulation results prove 
the feasibility of this DL-based adaptive inverse control scheme. The DL-based 
AIC system is robust to nonlinear plant parameter changes in that the plant 
output reassumes the value of the reference signal considerably faster than with 
the adaptive filter counterpart of the deep neural network. The settling and 
rise times of the step response are shown to improve in the DL-based AIC system.

DOI: 10.3390/s22165935
PMCID: PMC9415480
PMID: 36015696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflict of interest 
is associated with this work.


22. Rev Fac Cien Med Univ Nac Cordoba. 2021 Aug 23;78(3):243-248. doi: 
10.31053/1853.0605.v78.n3.25353.

[Mathematical law of cardiac dynamic systems: reduction of its evaluation time 
to 18 hours].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Rodríguez Velásquez JO(1), Correa Herrera SC(2), Pizano A(3), Ronderos MA(4), 
Prieto Bohórquez SE(5), Godoy C(6), Rojas JA(7), Benitez J(8), Rodríguez Correa 
D(9), Avilan E(10).

Author information:
(1)Asociación Colombiana de Neurocirugía. grupoinsight2025@gmail.com.
(2)Asociación Colombiana de Neurocirugía. scatalinacorreah@hotmail.com.
(3)Universidad de los Andes. alpizano@hotmail.com.
(4)Fundación Cardioinfantil. mronderos@gmail.com.
(5)Asociación Colombiana de Neurocirugía. dataarticulos@gmail.com.
(6)Fundación Cardioinfantil. einmal66@hotmail.com.
(7)Fundación Cardioinfantil. juan.alexander.jr@gmail.com.
(8)Dexa Diab Servicios Médicos. jbenitez@clinicadelcountry.com.
(9)Asociación Colombiana de Neurocirugía. dharmarodcor@gmail.com.
(10)Universidad Militar Nueva Granada. elimed86@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Previously, a physical-mathematical law was developed for the 
evaluation of continuous electrocardiographic and Holter registers, with which 
all cardiac attractors were deduced and normality, pathological states and 
evolution between states were differentiated.
There were taken 200 cardiac dynamics, 150 with different types of cardiac 
pathologies and 50 normal ones, to which the exponential law was applied in 18 
and 21 hours. For this, a sequence of heart rates was simulated, with which the 
chaotic attractor was constructed. Next, the mathematical diagnosis was 
determined with the law based on the spatial occupation of the attractor, and 
the fractal dimension was calculated. Finally, statistical validation of the 
mathematical method in 18 hours was performed against the Gold Standard.
RESULTS: Subjects with normal chaotic cardiac dynamics presented values in the 
Kp grid between 205 and 384, whereas subjects with pathological dynamics 
presented values between 61 and 191 in 18 hours. The evaluation of the 
concordance between the mathematical diagnosis in 18 hours and the conventional 
evaluation, taken as Gold Standard resulted in sensitivity and specificity 
values of 100% and a Kappa coefficient of 1.
CONCLUSION: It was confirmed the clinical capacity of the law to diagnose 
objectively and with reproducibility in 18 hours.

Publisher: INTRODUCCIÓN: Anteriormente se desarrolló una ley físico-matemática 
para la evaluación de registros electrocardiográficos continuos y Holters con la 
cual se dedujo la totalidad atractores cardíacos y se diferenció normalidad, 
estados patológicos y evolución entre estados.
MÉTODO: Fueron tomadas 200 dinámicas cardiacas, 150 con diferentes tipos de 
patologías cardiacas y 50 normales, a las cuales se aplicó la ley exponencial, 
en 18 y 21 horas. Para ello, se simuló una secuencia de frecuencias cardiacas, 
con la cual fue construido el atractor caótico. A continuación, se determinó el 
diagnóstico matemático a partir de la ley, con base en la ocupación espacial del 
atractor y se calculó la dimensión fractal. Finalmente, se realizó la validación 
estadística del método matemático en 18 horas frente al Gold Standard.
RESULTADOS: Sujetos con dinámicas cardiacas caóticas normales presentaron 
valores en la rejilla Kp entre 205 y 384, mientras que los sujetos con dinámicas 
patológicas presentaron valores entre 61 y 191 en 18 horas. La evaluación de la 
concordancia entre el diagnóstico matemático en 18 horas y la evaluación 
convencional tomada Gold Standard, dio como resultado valores de sensibilidad y 
especificidad de 100% y un coeficiente Kappa de 1.
CONCLUSIÓN: Se confirmó la capacidad clínica de la ley para diagnosticar de 
forma objetiva y reproducible en 18 horas.

Plain Language Summary: La evolución de la física teórica ha permitido generar 
múltiples abordajes para estudiar fenómenos altamente complejos de la naturaleza 
sin importar sus causas. Siguiendo este pensamiento, se ha desarrollado una 
metodología que diagnostica la dinámica cardíaca a partir de una ley matemática 
que diferencia la normalidad de la enfermedad mediante parámetros cuantitativos 
y de la que se demuestra su aplicabilidad clínica al reducir su tiempo de 
aplicación.

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba

DOI: 10.31053/1853.0605.v78.n3.25353
PMCID: PMC8760907
PMID: 34617717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicto de interés: Ninguno.


23. Gerontology. 2010;56(3):335-44. doi: 10.1159/000262445. Epub 2009 Nov 26.

A dynamic systems approach to the effects of aging on bimanual coordination.

Temprado JJ(1), Vercruysse S, Salesse R, Berton E.

Author information:
(1)UMR 'Institut des Sciences du Mouvement' CNRS et Université de la 
Méditerranée, Marseille, France. jean-jacques.temprado@univmed.fr

The present study examined the effects of aging on the execution of a bimanual 
coordination task in a classical phase transition paradigm in which coordination 
patterns (in-phase and anti-phase) and movement frequency were manipulated. Two 
groups of adults, the so-called young (average age 26 years) and old (average 
age 71 years) participants, performed both in-phase and anti-phase patterns at 
different frequencies. As we expected variability of relative phase was larger 
for older participants than for younger ones for both the in-phase and the 
anti-phase coordination patterns. Moreover, phase transitions occurred at lower 
frequencies for older participants and more transitions were observed for older 
than for younger participants. Although no specific hypotheses were made about 
the prominent source(s) of age-related changes in coordination dynamics (i.e., 
an alteration in the coupling function and/or an increase of the magnitude of 
noise), our results suggest that these changes might result from increases in 
the (neural) noise to be found in the (bimanual) action system.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000262445
PMID: 19940462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. FEBS Lett. 2005 Mar 21;579(8):1846-53. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.02.008.

The dynamic systems approach to control and regulation of intracellular 
networks.

Wolkenhauer O(1), Ullah M, Wellstead P, Cho KH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Group, 
University of Rostock, Albert Einstein Str. 21, 18059 Rostock, Germany. 
olaf.wolkenhauer@uni-rostock.de

Systems theory and cell biology have enjoyed a long relationship that has 
received renewed interest in recent years in the context of systems biology. The 
term 'systems' in systems biology comes from systems theory or dynamic systems 
theory: systems biology is defined through the application of systems- and 
signal-oriented approaches for an understanding of inter- and intra-cellular 
dynamic processes. The aim of the present text is to review the systems and 
control perspective of dynamic systems. The biologist's conceptual framework for 
representing the variables of a biochemical reaction network, and for describing 
their relationships, are pathway maps. A principal goal of systems biology is to 
turn these static maps into dynamic models, which can provide insight into the 
temporal evolution of biochemical reaction networks. Towards this end, we review 
the case for differential equation models as a 'natural' representation of 
causal entailment in pathways. Block-diagrams, commonly used in the engineering 
sciences, are introduced and compared to pathway maps. The stimulus-response 
representation of a molecular system is a necessary condition for an 
understanding of dynamic interactions among the components that make up a 
pathway. Using simple examples, we show how biochemical reactions are modelled 
in the dynamic systems framework and visualized using block-diagrams.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.02.008
PMID: 15763562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biomedicines. 2023 Apr 22;11(5):1240. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11051240.

Neurodifferentiation and Neuroprotection Potential of Mesenchymal Stromal 
Cell-Derived Secretome Produced in Different Dynamic Systems.

Marques CR(1)(2), Fuzeta MA(3)(4), Dos Santos Cunha RM(3)(4), Pereira-Sousa 
J(1)(2), Silva D(1)(2), Campos J(1)(2), Teixeira-Castro A(1)(2), Sousa RA(5), 
Fernandes-Platzgummer A(3)(4), da Silva CL(3)(4), Salgado AJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, 
University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.
(2)ICVS-3Bs PT Government Associate Laboratory, 4710-057 Braga/Guimarães, 
Portugal.
(3)Department of Bioengineering and iBB-Institute for Bioengineering and 
Biosciences, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 
Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)Associate Laboratory i4HB-Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, Instituto 
Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal.
(5)Stemmatters, Biotecnologia e Medicina Regenerativa S.A., 4805-017 Barco, 
Portugal.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder 
and is characterized by the degeneration of the dopamine (DA) neurons in the 
substantia nigra pars compacta, leading to a loss of DA in the basal ganglia. 
The presence of aggregates of alpha-synuclein (α-synuclein) is seen as the main 
contributor to the pathogenesis and progression of PD. Evidence suggests that 
the secretome of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) could be a potential cell-free 
therapy for PD. However, to accelerate the integration of this therapy in the 
clinical setting, there is still the need to develop a protocol for the 
large-scale production of secretome under good manufacturing practices (GMP) 
guidelines. Bioreactors have the capacity to produce large quantities of 
secretomes in a scalable manner, surpassing the limitations of planar static 
culture systems. However, few studies focused on the influence of the culture 
system used to expand MSC, on the secretome composition. In this work, we 
studied the capacity of the secretome produced by bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSC) expanded in a spinner flask (SP) and in a 
Vertical-Wheel™ bioreactor (VWBR) system, to induce neurodifferentiation of 
human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs) and to prevent dopaminergic neuron 
degeneration caused by the overexpression of α-synuclein in one Caenorhabditis 
elegans model of PD. Results showed that secretomes from both systems were able 
to induce neurodifferentiation, though the secretome produced in the SP system 
had a greater effect. Additionally, in the conditions of our study, only the 
secretome produced in SP had a neuroprotective potential. Lastly, the secretomes 
had different profiles regarding the presence and/or specific intensity of 
different molecules, namely, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-4, matrix 
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2), and 3 (MMP3), tumor necrosis factor-beta (TNF-β), 
osteopontin, nerve growth factor beta (NGFβ), granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (GCSF), heparin-binding (HB) epithelial growth factor (EGF)-like growth 
factor (HB-EGF), and IL-13. Overall, our results suggest that the culture 
conditions might have influenced the secretory profiles of cultured cells and, 
consequently, the observed effects. Additional studies should further explore 
the effects that different culture systems have on the secretome potential of 
PD.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11051240
PMCID: PMC10215864
PMID: 37238911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


26. Microorganisms. 2021 Feb 19;9(2):428. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9020428.

Relevance of Biofilm Models in Periodontal Research: From Static to Dynamic 
Systems.

Sánchez MC(1)(2), Alonso-Español A(1), Ribeiro-Vidal H(1), Alonso B(1), Herrera 
D(1), Sanz M(1).

Author information:
(1)ETEP (Etiology and Therapy of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases) Research 
Group, University Complutense of Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine, University Complutense of Madrid, 
28040 Madrid, Spain.

Microbial biofilm modeling has improved in sophistication and scope, although 
only a limited number of standardized protocols are available. This review 
presents an example of a biofilm model, along with its evolution and application 
in studying periodontal and peri-implant diseases. In 2011, the ETEP (Etiology 
and Therapy of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases) research group at the 
University Complutense of Madrid developed an in vitro biofilm static model 
using representative bacteria from the subgingival microbiota, demonstrating a 
pattern of bacterial colonization and maturation similar to in vivo subgingival 
biofilms. When the model and its methodology were standardized, the ETEP 
research group employed the validated in vitro biofilm model for testing in 
different applications. The evolution of this model is described in this 
manuscript, from the mere observation of biofilm growth and maturation on static 
models on hydroxyapatite or titanium discs, to the evaluation of the impact of 
dental implant surface composition and micro-structure using the dynamic biofilm 
model. This evolution was based on reproducing the ideal microenvironmental 
conditions for bacterial growth within a bioreactor and reaching the target 
surfaces using the fluid dynamics mimicking the salivary flow. The development 
of this relevant biofilm model has become a powerful tool to study the essential 
processes that regulate the formation and maturation of these important 
microbial communities, as well as their behavior when exposed to different 
antimicrobial compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9020428
PMCID: PMC7922797
PMID: 33669562

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


27. Gerontologist. 2021 Apr 3;61(3):304-311. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnaa046.

Dynamic Systems, Contextual Influences, and Multiple Timescales: Emotion 
Regulation as a Resilience Resource.

Bergeman CS(1), Blaxton J(1), Joiner R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Indiana.

We need to understand how psychosocial resources develop, identify the 
influences that threaten their maintenance, detect the circumstances under which 
these resources are used, and elucidate the factors that support and promote 
their growth. Three important components to studying the development of 
resilience include its dynamic nature, context, and timescale of measurement. 
Dynamic systems (DS) approaches focus on physiological and psychological 
structures underling the development of resilience by explicitly mapping 
parameters of change onto their corresponding aspects of functioning. Previous 
research has captured emotion regulation within individuals, across traits, and 
in close personal relationships to show how these methods depict dynamic 
regulation/resilience resources and their influence on outcomes of interest. The 
use of multi-time scaled data informs how daily emotion regulation is disrupted 
in the context of stress to produce dysregulation and disease later in the life 
course. This approach can also reveal how resilience resources counteract these 
adverse processes and allow others to thrive and be well. Researchers must not 
only explore short-term variation in constructs of interest, but also explore 
how these shorter-term fluctuations contribute to longer-term changes. The 
confluence of DS, contextual influences, and multiple timescales provides an 
important set of tools to better understand development.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geront/gnaa046
PMCID: PMC8023361
PMID: 32474593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Music Ther. 2023 Oct 7;60(3):254-281. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thad010.

Studying Nonlinear Change in Music Therapy Applying Dynamic Systems Theory.

Antichi L(1), Giannini M(1), Edwards J(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Florence, Firenze, Italy.
(2)University of New England, Armidale, NSW, Australia.

Change in music therapy is often modeled linearly. In linear analysis, change is 
represented as the difference between the scores recorded before and after 
treatment, where changes in the input are proportional to the output. However, 
changes in complex systems are often not linear and depend on time. We propose 
Dynamic Systems Theory (DST) as a means to overcome the shortcomings of linear 
analysis and enrich the study of change in music therapy. This article aims to 
introduce and critically discuss the applications of DST in music therapy, 
focusing on its theoretical and methodological aspects. DST offers a 
meta-framework to model nonlinear change in music therapy, considering time as 
continuous. The application of DST can further enhance the understanding of how 
music therapy works, the shape of the change, and how the relevant therapeutic 
processes within music therapy support therapeutic change. An introduction to 
DST theory is provided along with its history, implications, assessment methods, 
statistical analyses, mathematical modeling, and implementation examples in 
music therapy research.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Music Therapy Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jmt/thad010
PMID: 37440201


29. J Anal Psychol. 2011 Jun;56(3):334-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-5922.2011.01913_1.x.

A Jungian contribution to a dynamic systems understanding of disorganized 
attachment.

Carter L(1).

Author information:
(1)lcarter20@cox.net

This panel emerged from shared clinical concerns when working with adult 
patients whose presentation style was reminiscent of a disorganized (Type D) 
infant attachment pattern. Psychotherapeutic work with such patients poses 
complicated transference and countertransference dilemmas which are addressed by 
all four panellists via theory and clinical vignettes. In common is an interest 
in contemporary attachment, neuroscience and trauma theories and their 
relationship to analytical psychology. Intergenerational trauma seems to be a 
salient factor in the evolution of fragmented and fragmenting interactions that 
lead to failures in self-coherence and healthy interpersonal relationships. Such 
early relational trauma is compounded by further episodes of abuse and neglect 
leading to failure in a core sense of self. These clinicians share how they have 
integrated theory and practice in order to help dissociated and disorganized 
patients to transform their dark and extraordinary suffering through implicit 
and explicit experiences with the analyst into new, life giving patterns of 
relationship with self and others. The alchemy of transformation, both positive 
and negative, is evident in the case material presented.

© 2011, The Society of Analytical Psychology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-5922.2011.01913_1.x
PMID: 21675978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Sch Psychol. 2010 Jun;48(3):187-218. doi: 10.1016/j.jsp.2010.01.001. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

Teacher-child relationships as dynamic systems.

O'Connor E(1).

Author information:
(1)New York University, USA. eoc2@nyu.edu <eoc2@nyu.edu>

The purpose of the present study was to examine factors associated with the 
quality of the teacher-child relationship from first through fifth grade using 
data from phases I, II and III of the National Institutes of Child Health and 
Human Development Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development, a prospective 
study of 1364 children from birth through sixth grade. On average, children 
evidenced moderately high quality relationships with teachers in fifth grade. 
However, there was extensive variation in fifth grade relationship quality 
across children. Children who received more support and stimulation at home and 
whose parents had higher quality interactions with the school had higher quality 
relationships. Additionally, children in classrooms with more positive 
environments and better management had higher quality relationships. Lastly, 
females, European-American children, children with lower levels of behavior 
problems and children who had higher quality relationships with their teachers 
in kindergarten also had higher quality relationships with teachers. On average, 
children evidenced decreases in the quality of their relationships with teachers 
from first through fifth grade. Interestingly, children whose parents had more 
contact with their schools, who were in schools where teachers received higher 
salaries and in classrooms that had more positive emotional climates and that 
were better managed evidenced slower rates of decline in relationship quality. 
Implications for theory and practice are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsp.2010.01.001
PMID: 20380947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2024 Apr;65(4):481-507. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.13960. 
Epub 2024 Feb 23.

Annual Research Review: 'There, the dance is - at the still point of the turning 
world' - dynamic systems perspectives on coregulation and dysregulation during 
early development.

Wass S(1), Greenwood E(1), Esposito G(1), Smith C(2), Necef I(1), Phillips E(1).

Author information:
(1)UEL BabyDevLab, Department of Psychology, University of East London, London, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Psychology Psychiatry and Neuroscience, King's College, London, 
UK.

Comment in
    J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2024 May;65(5):729-732. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.13981.

During development we transition from coregulation (where regulatory processes 
are shared between child and caregiver) to self-regulation. Most early 
coregulatory interactions aim to manage fluctuations in the infant's arousal and 
alertness; but over time, coregulatory processes become progressively elaborated 
to encompass other functions such as sociocommunicative development, attention 
and executive control. The fundamental aim of coregulation is to help maintain 
an optimal 'critical state' between hypo- and hyperactivity. Here, we present a 
dynamic framework for understanding child-caregiver coregulatory interactions in 
the context of psychopathology. Early coregulatory processes involve both 
passive entrainment, through which a child's state entrains to the caregiver's, 
and active contingent responsiveness, through which the caregiver changes their 
behaviour in response to behaviours from the child. Similar principles, of 
interactive but asymmetric contingency, drive joint attention and the 
maintenance of epistemic states as well as arousal/alertness, emotion regulation 
and sociocommunicative development. We describe three ways in which active 
child-caregiver regulation can develop atypically, in conditions such as Autism, 
ADHD, anxiety and depression. The most well-known of these is insufficient 
contingent responsiveness, leading to reduced synchrony, which has been shown 
across a range of modalities in different disorders, and which is the target of 
most current interventions. We also present evidence that excessive contingent 
responsiveness and excessive synchrony can develop in some circumstances. And we 
show that positive feedback interactions can develop, which are contingent but 
mutually amplificatory child-caregiver interactions that drive the child further 
from their critical state. We discuss implications of these findings for future 
intervention research, and directions for future work.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for Child and Adolescent Mental 
Health.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpp.13960
PMID: 38390803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Magn Reson. 2024 Feb;359:107617. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2024.107617. Epub 2024 Jan 
17.

INEPT and CP transfer efficiencies of dynamic systems in MAS solid-state NMR.

Aebischer K(1), Ernst M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zürich, 
Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 2, Zürich, 8093, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zürich, 
Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 2, Zürich, 8093, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
maer@ethz.ch.

Hartmann-Hahn cross polarization and INEPT polarization transfer are the most 
popular sequences to increase the polarization of low-γ nuclei in magic-angle 
spinning solid-state NMR. It is well known that the two methods preferentially 
lead to polarization transfer in different parts of molecules. Cross 
polarization works best in rigid segments of the molecule while INEPT-based 
polarization transfer is efficient in highly mobile segments where (nearly) 
isotropic motion averages out the dipolar couplings. However, there have only 
been few attempts to define the time scales of motion that are compatible with 
cross polarization or INEPT transfer in a more quantitative way. We have used 
simple isotropic jump models in combination with simulations based on the 
stochastic Liouville equation to elucidate the time scales of motion that allow 
either cross polarization or INEPT-based polarization transfer. We investigate 
which motional time scales interfere with one or both polarization-transfer 
schemes. We have modeled isolated I-S two-spin systems, strongly-coupled I2S 
three-spin systems and more loosely coupled I-I-S three-spin systems as well as 
I3S groups. Such fragments can be used as models for typical environments in 
fully deuterated and back-exchanged molecules (I-S), for fully protonated 
molecules (I2S and I3S) or situations in between (I-I-S).

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmr.2024.107617
PMID: 38244331

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Matthias Ernst reports financial 
support was provided by Swiss National Science Foundation. If there are other 
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or 
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported 
in this paper.


33. Adv Child Dev Behav. 2017;52:43-80. doi: 10.1016/bs.acdb.2016.10.002. Epub 2017 
Jan 30.

Applications of Dynamic Systems Theory to Cognition and Development: New 
Frontiers.

Perone S(1), Simmering VR(2).

Author information:
(1)Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States. Electronic address: 
sammy.perone@wsu.edu.
(2)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States. Electronic 
address: simmering@wisc.edu.

A central goal in developmental science is to explain the emergence of new 
behavioral forms. Researchers consider potential sources of behavioral change 
depending partly on their theoretical perspective. This chapter reviews one 
perspective, dynamic systems theory, which emphasizes the interactions among 
multiple components to drive behavior and developmental change. To illustrate 
the central concepts of dynamic systems theory, we describe empirical and 
computational studies from a range of domains, including motor development, the 
Piagetian A-not-B task, infant visual recognition, visual working memory 
capacity, and language learning. We conclude by advocating for a broader 
application of dynamic systems approaches to understanding cognitive and 
behavioral development, laying out the remaining barriers we see and suggested 
ways to overcome them.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.acdb.2016.10.002
PMID: 28215288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2024 Feb;51(1):39-63. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-023-09870-y. Epub 2023 Jun 30.

Classical structural identifiability methodology applied to low-dimensional 
dynamic systems in receptor theory.

White C(1), Rottschäfer V(2)(3), Bridge L(4).

Author information:
(1)Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(2)Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)University of the West of England, Bristol, UK. lloyd.bridge@uwe.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2024 Feb;51(1):91. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-023-09879-3.

Mathematical modelling has become a key tool in pharmacological analysis, 
towards understanding dynamics of cell signalling and quantifying 
ligand-receptor interactions. Ordinary differential equation (ODE) models in 
receptor theory may be used to parameterise such interactions using timecourse 
data, but attention needs to be paid to the theoretical identifiability of the 
parameters of interest. Identifiability analysis is an often overlooked step in 
many bio-modelling works. In this paper we introduce structural identifiability 
analysis (SIA) to the field of receptor theory by applying three classical SIA 
methods (transfer function, Taylor Series and similarity transformation) to 
ligand-receptor binding models of biological importance (single ligand and 
Motulsky-Mahan competition binding at monomers, and a recently presented model 
of a single ligand binding at receptor dimers). New results are obtained which 
indicate the identifiable parameters for a single timecourse for Motulsky-Mahan 
binding and dimerised receptor binding. Importantly, we further consider 
combinations of experiments which may be performed to overcome issues of 
non-identifiability, to ensure the practical applicability of the work. The 
three SIA methods are demonstrated through a tutorial-style approach, using 
detailed calculations, which show the methods to be tractable for the 
low-dimensional ODE models.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-023-09870-y
PMCID: PMC10884104
PMID: 37389744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2023 Nov;34(11):9128-9138. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3155876. Epub 2023 Oct 27.

Performance Optimization and Fault-Tolerance of Highly Dynamic Systems Via 
Q-Learning With an Incrementally Attached Controller Gain System.

Xu Y, Zhao Z, Yin S.

High-performance and reliable control of systems that are highly dynamic and 
open-loop unstable is challenging but of considerable practical interest. Thus, 
this article investigates the performance optimization and fault tolerance of 
highly dynamic systems. First, an incremental control structure is proposed, 
where a controller gain system is attached to the predesigned controller, and by 
reconfiguring the controller gain system, the performance can be equivalently 
optimized as configuring the predesigned one. The incremental attachment of the 
controller gain system does not modify the existing control system, and it can 
be easily attached via various communication channels. Second, a structure 
integrating fault-tolerance strategy and hardware redundancy is proposed. Under 
this structure, command fusion and fault-tolerance strategies are developed 
where the control commands from different control units are optimally fused, and 
each control unit can be reconfigured w.r.t. the performance of the other ones. 
Furthermore, Q -learning algorithms are developed to realize the proposed 
structures and strategies in real-time model-freely. As such, varying 
operational conditions of the highly dynamic system can be tackled. Finally, the 
proposed structures and algorithms are validated case by case to show their 
effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3155876
PMID: 35290189


36. Eval Program Plann. 2016 Feb;54:162-72. doi: 10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2015.07.010. 
Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Dynamic systems and the role of evaluation: The case of the Green Communities 
project.

Anzoise V(1), Sardo S(2).

Author information:
(1)European Centre for Living Technology, Ca' Foscari University of Venice, S. 
Marco 2940, 30124 Venice, Italy. Electronic address: valentina.anzoise@unive.it.
(2)Department of Innovation and Economic Organization, BI Norwegian Business 
School, Nydalsveien 37, N-0442 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: 
stefania.sardo@bi.no.

The crucial role evaluation can play in the co-development of project design and 
its implementation will be addressed through the analysis of a case study, the 
Green Communities (GC) project, funded by the Italian Ministry of Environment 
within the EU Interregional Operational Program (2007-2013) "Renewable Energy 
and Energy Efficiency". The project's broader goals included an attempt to 
trigger a change in Italian local development strategies, especially for 
mountain and inland areas, which would be tailored to the real needs of 
communities, and based on a sustainable exploitation and management of the 
territorial assets. The goal was not achieved, and this paper addresses the 
issues of how GC could have been more effective in fostering a vision of change, 
and which design adaptations and evaluation procedures would have allowed the 
project to better cope with the unexpected consequences and resistances it 
encountered. The conclusions drawn are that projects should be conceived, 
designed and carried out as dynamic systems, inclusive of a dynamic and engaged 
evaluation enabling the generation of feedbacks loops, iteratively interpreting 
the narratives and dynamics unfolding within the project, and actively 
monitoring the potential of various relationships among project participants for 
generating positive social change.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2015.07.010
PMID: 26215766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Res Child Adolesc Psychopathol. 2023 Aug;51(8):1225-1235. doi: 
10.1007/s10802-023-01057-w. Epub 2023 Mar 31.

A Dynamic Systems Analysis of Dyadic Flexibility and Shared Affect in 
Preschoolers with and Without Major Depressive Disorder.

Quiñones-Camacho LE(1), Whalen DJ(2), Luby JL(2), Gilbert KE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, 1912 
Speedway STE 5.708 Mail Stop D5800, 78712, Austin, TX, USA. 
laura.quinonescamacho@austin.utexas.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.

Preschool onset Major Depressive Disorder (PO-MDD) is a severe disorder often 
leading to chronic impairment and poor outcomes across development. Recent work 
suggests that the caregiver-child relationship may contribute to PO-MDD symptoms 
partially through disrupted caregiver-child interactions. The current study uses 
a dynamic systems approach to investigate whether co-regulation patterns in a 
dyad with a child experiencing PO-MDD differ from dyads with a child without the 
disorder. Preschoolers between the ages of 3-7 years-old (N = 215; 
M(SD) = 5.22(1.06); 35% girls; 77% white) were recruited for a randomized 
controlled trial of an adapted version of parent-child interaction therapy. An 
additional sample (N = 50; M(SD) = 5.17(.84)' 34% girls; 76% white) was 
recruited as a control group. Dyads completed two interactive tasks and affect 
was coded throughout the interaction. State Space Grids (SSG) were used to 
derive measures of dyadic affective flexibility (i.e., affective variability in 
dyadic interactions) and shared affect. PO-MDD dyads did not differ from 
controls in dyadic affective flexibility. However, there were significant 
differences in shared positive and neutral affect. PO-MDD dyads spent less time 
and had fewer instances of shared positive affect and spent more time and had 
more instances of shared neutral affect than the community control group. These 
comparisons survived multiple comparisons correction. There were no differences 
for shared negative affect. Findings suggest that children experiencing PO-MDD 
have differing dyadic affective experiences with their caregivers than healthy 
developing children, which may be a mechanism through which depressive states 
are reinforced and could be targeted for treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10802-023-01057-w
PMCID: PMC12010482
PMID: 37000281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that they have no competing or potential conflicts of interest.


38. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2023 May-Jun;20(3):1667-1678. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2022.3156759. Epub 2023 Jun 5.

Sparse Triangular Decomposition for Computing Equilibria of Biological Dynamic 
Systems Based on Chordal Graphs.

Mou C, Ju W.

Many biological systems are modeled mathematically as dynamic systems in the 
form of polynomial or rational differential equations. In this paper we apply 
sparse triangular decomposition to compute the equilibria of biological dynamic 
systems by exploiting the inherent sparsity of parameter-free systems via the 
chordal graph and by constructing suitable elimination orderings for parametric 
systems using the newly introduced block chordal graph. Our experiments with 
parameter-free systems provide practical information on suitable algorithms for 
chordal completion and verify the performance gains of sparse triangular 
decomposition against the ordinary one in the settings of computation of the 
equilibria. Then we establish full characterizations of block chordal graphs and 
propose algorithms for testing block chordality and constructing minimal block 
chordal completions. Based on these results, which are of their own merits in 
graph theory, we present a new algorithm of sparse triangular decomposition for 
parametric systems and apply it to detect the equilibria of parametric 
biological dynamic systems, with remarkable speedups against ordinary triangular 
decomposition verified by the experiments.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2022.3156759
PMID: 35254988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2012 Jun;15(3):237-44. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2012.01.010. 
Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Elements of a dynamic systems model of canopy photosynthesis.

Zhu XG(1), Song Q, Ort DR.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice Research, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for 
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Yueyang Road 320, Shanghai, China. zhuxinguang@picb.ac.cn

Improving photosynthesis throughout the full canopy rather than photosynthesis 
of only the top leaves of the canopy is central to improving crop yields. Many 
canopy photosynthesis models have been developed from physiological and 
ecological perspectives, however most do not consider heterogeneities of 
microclimatic factors inside a canopy, canopy dynamics and associated 
energetics, or competition among different plants, and most models lack a direct 
linkage to molecular processes. Here we described the rationale, elements, and 
approaches necessary to build a dynamic systems model of canopy photosynthesis. 
A systems model should integrate metabolic processes including photosynthesis, 
respiration, nitrogen metabolism, resource re-mobilization and photosynthate 
partitioning with canopy level light, CO(2), water vapor distributions and heat 
exchange processes. In so doing a systems-based canopy photosynthesis model will 
enable studies of molecular ecology and dramatically improve our insight into 
engineering crops for improved canopy photosynthetic CO(2) uptake, resource use 
efficiencies and yields.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbi.2012.01.010
PMID: 22325454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Psychopathol. 2023 May;35(2):782-790. doi: 10.1017/S0954579422000037. Epub 
2022 Mar 2.

A dynamic systems perspective towards executive function development: 
Susceptibility at both ends for inhibitory control.

Wu Q(1), Jalapa K(1), Han SJ(1), Tawfiq D(1), Cui M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development & Family Science, College of Health and Human 
Sciences, Florida State University. Tallahassee, FL, USA.

In light of the dynamic systems perspective, the current study expanded existing 
literature by examining the moderating effect of maternal sensitivity on the 
quadratic association between infant negative reactivity and future executive 
function development. Using a longitudinal, multimethod design, we addressed 
executive function development among preschoolers. This study utilized data from 
the Family Life Project (N = 1292). Infant negative reactivity at 6 months, 
maternal sensitivity across first 3 years, and executive functions during 
preschool age were observational assessed. A path model with moderation analyses 
revealed a U-shaped quadratic association between infant negative reactivity and 
preschoolers' inhibitory control, only when maternal sensitivity was high. The 
results suggest that maternal sensitivity may assist infants with both low and 
high, but not moderate, levels of negative reactivity towards better executive 
function development. Findings support the ongoing nonlinear person-environment 
interplay during early years of life.

DOI: 10.1017/S0954579422000037
PMCID: PMC9437139
PMID: 35232518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest. No conflict of interest 
was disclosed by the authors.


41. Front Psychol. 2022 May 6;13:787710. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.787710. eCollection 
2022.

A Dynamic Systems Study on Complexity, Accuracy, and Fluency in English Writing 
Development by Chinese University Students.

Zhang S(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Foreign Languages, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China.

This study investigated the development of lexical complexity, sentence 
complexity, accuracy, and fluency in the English writing of 22 Chinese 
university students from the perspective of Complex Dynamic Systems Theory 
(CDST). Compositions were assigned 30 times over the course of one academic year 
through Pigaiwang, an online platform that automatically evaluates writing. A 
modified retrodictive modeling approach was adopted. Specifically, a 
longitudinal cluster analysis was used to examine emergent prototypes. A moving 
correlation analysis and retrodictive interviews were conducted to study the 
signature dynamics that produce each prototype. At each collection, the 22 
student compositions were classified into two clusters. One cluster contained 
those students who performed better than average in accuracy, but worse in the 
other three variables. The other cluster comprised those students with the 
opposite performance. Students moved continuously between the two clusters; and 
their change trajectories can be categorized into three prototypes: a 
continuously stable type, an initially variable and then stable type, and a 
continuously variable type. Case studies of three students representing the 
three emergent prototypes indicated that the signature dynamics for the three 
prototypes were related to dynamic interactions among different variables and 
dynamic changes in affect-related elements in the form of writing interests, 
motivation, and strategies. The initial conditions and the feedback from 
Pigaiwang acted as key control parameters in shaping the prototypes. The 
continuously variable prototype developed their writing proficiency to the 
greatest extent and had the most variability. Based upon the findings, 
implications for teaching L2 writing are discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Zhang, Zhang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.787710
PMCID: PMC9120842
PMID: 35602713

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


42. Top Cogn Sci. 2015 Apr;7(2):191-205. doi: 10.1111/tops.12129. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Grounding cognitive-level processes in behavior: the view from dynamic systems 
theory.

Samuelson LK(1), Jenkins GW, Spencer JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and DeLTA Center, University of Iowa.

Marr's seminal work laid out a program of research by specifying key questions 
for cognitive science at different levels of analysis. Because dynamic systems 
theory (DST) focuses on time and interdependence of components, DST research 
programs come to very different conclusions regarding the nature of cognitive 
change. We review a specific DST approach to cognitive-level processes: dynamic 
field theory (DFT). We review research applying DFT to several cognitive-level 
processes: object permanence, naming hierarchical categories, and inferring 
intent, that demonstrate the difference in understanding of behavior and 
cognition that results from a DST perspective. These point to a central 
challenge for cognitive science research as defined by Marr-emergence. We argue 
that appreciating emergence raises questions about the utility of 
computational-level analyses and opens the door to insights concerning the 
origin of novel forms of behavior and thought (e.g., a new chess strategy). We 
contend this is one of the most fundamental questions about cognition and 
behavior.

Copyright © 2015 Cognitive Science Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/tops.12129
PMCID: PMC4475347
PMID: 25755203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Food Energy Secur. 2016 Feb;5(1):18-25. doi: 10.1002/fes3.74. Epub 2016 Jan 4.

Genetics-based dynamic systems model of canopy photosynthesis: the key to 
improve light and resource use efficiencies for crops.

Song Q(1), Chu C(2), Parry MA(3), Zhu XG(1).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory for Computational Biology and State Key Laboratory of 
Hybrid Rice Partner Institute for Computational Biology Chinese Academy of 
Sciences Shanghai 200031 China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center of Plant Gene 
Research (Beijing) Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology CAS Beijing 
100101 China.
(3)Lancaster Environment Centre Lancaster University Lancaster LA1 4YQ UK.

Improving canopy photosynthetic light use efficiency instead of leaf 
photosynthesis holds great potential to catalyze the next "green revolution". 
However, leaves in a canopy experience different biochemical limitations due to 
the heterogeneities of microclimates and also physiological parameters. 
Mechanistic dynamic systems models of canopy photosynthesis are now available 
which can be used to design the optimal canopy architectural and physiological 
parameters to maximize CO 2 uptake. Rapid development of modern crop genetics 
research now makes it possible to link such canopy models with genetic 
variations of crops to develop genetics-based dynamic systems models of canopy 
photosynthesis. Such models can guide marker-assisted breeding or genomic 
selection or engineering of crops to enhance light and nitrogen use efficiencies 
for different regions under future climate change scenarios.

DOI: 10.1002/fes3.74
PMCID: PMC5108349
PMID: 27867502


44. Chem Soc Rev. 2015 Jun 7;44(11):3358-77. doi: 10.1039/c5cs00118h.

Wavelength-selective cleavage of photoprotecting groups: strategies and 
applications in dynamic systems.

Hansen MJ(1), Velema WA, Lerch MM, Szymanski W, Feringa BL.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Systems Chemistry, Stratingh Institute for Chemistry, University 
of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
b.l.feringa@rug.nl.

Photocleavable protecting groups (PPGs) are extensively used in chemical and 
biological sciences. In their application, advantage is taken of using light as 
an external, non-invasive stimulus, which can be delivered with very high 
spatiotemporal precision. More recently, orthogonally addressing multiple PPGs, 
in a single system and with different wavelengths of light, has been explored. 
This approach allows one to independently control multiple functionalities in an 
external, non-invasive fashion. In this tutorial review, we discuss the design 
principles for dynamic systems involving wavelength-selective deprotection, 
focusing on the choice and optimization of PPGs, synthetic methods for their 
introduction and strategies for combining multiple PPGs into one system. 
Finally, we illustrate the design principles with representative examples, 
aiming at providing the reader with an instructive overview on how the 
wavelength-selective cleavage of photoprotecting groups can be applied in 
materials science, organic synthesis and biological systems.

DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00118h
PMID: 25917924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Behav Res Ther. 2024 Jun;177:104524. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2024.104524. Epub 2024 
Mar 27.

Perseveration on suicidal thoughts and images in daily life: An examination of 
the cognitive model of suicide through a dynamic systems lens.

Rogers ML(1), Law KC(2), Lawrence OC(3), Mandel AA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, USA. 
Electronic address: megan.rogers@txstate.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Seattle Pacific University, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, 
USA.

According to the cognitive model of suicide, interactions between hopelessness 
and attentional biases toward suicidal information create a narrowed attentional 
focus on suicide as a viable solution, particularly in the presence of life 
stress, leading to increased suicide risk. This study used a dynamic systems 
approach to examine the short-term temporal patterns between stress, 
hopelessness, suicide-specific rumination, and suicidal intent. Adults (N = 237; 
M = 27.12 years; 62% cisgender women; 87% White/European American) with elevated 
suicidal ideation completed ecological momentary assessments six times a day for 
14 days. A multilevel model approach informed by dynamic systems theory was used 
to simultaneously assess stable and dynamic temporal processes underlying 
perceived stress, hopelessness, suicide-specific rumination, and suicidal 
intent. Each variable demonstrated temporal stability. In support of the 
cognitive model of suicide, we observed (1) a reciprocal relationship between 
stress and hopelessness such that stress and hopelessness amplified each other 
(early-stage processes), and (2) reinforcing loops such that hopelessness, 
suicide-specific rumination, and suicidal intent amplified each other 
(later-stage processes). A dynamic systems modeling approach underscored the 
negative impact of a perpetuating cycle of suicide-specific rumination, 
deepening hopelessness, and escalating suicidal intent on increasing suicide 
risk, which may be targets for intervention.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2024.104524
PMID: 38583292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


46. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2007 Aug;5(4):977-86. doi: 10.1142/s0219720007002990.

Modeling cancer: integration of "omics" information in dynamic systems.

Stransky B(1), Barrera J, Ohno-Machado L, De Souza SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University, of São Paulo, Rua do 
Matão, 1010 - Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, CEP 05508-090, Brasil. 
stransky@ime.usp.br

The last 10 years have seen the rise of many technologies that produce an 
unprecedented amount of genome-scale data from many organisms. Although the 
research community has been successful in exploring these data, many challenges 
still persist. One of them is the effective integration of such data sets 
directly into approaches based on mathematical modeling of biological systems. 
Applications in cancer are a good example. The bridge between information and 
modeling in cancer can be achieved by two major types of complementary 
strategies. First, there is a bottom-up approach, in which data generates 
information about structure and relationship between components of a given 
system. In addition, there is a top-down approach, where cybernetic and 
systems-theoretical knowledge are used to create models that describe mechanisms 
and dynamics of the system. These approaches can also be linked to yield 
multi-scale models combining detailed mechanism and wide biological scope. Here 
we give an overall picture of this field and discuss possible strategies to 
approach the major challenges ahead.

DOI: 10.1142/s0219720007002990
PMID: 17787066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Community Psychol. 2009 Jun;43(3-4):241-56. doi: 10.1007/s10464-009-9228-x.

Community, culture and sustainability in multilevel dynamic systems intervention 
science.

Schensul JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Community Research, 2 Hartford Square West, Ste. 100, Hartford, 
CT 06106, USA. Jean.schensul@icrweb.org

This paper addresses intertwined issues in the conceptualization, implementation 
and evaluation of multilevel dynamic systems intervention science (MDSIS). 
Interventions are systematically planned, conducted and evaluated social 
science-based cultural products intercepting the lives of people and 
institutions in the context of multiple additional events and processes (which 
also may be referred to as interventions) that may speed, slow or reduce change 
towards a desired outcome. Multilevel interventions address change efforts at 
multiple social levels in the hope that effects at each level will forge 
synergistic links, facilitating movement toward desired change. This paper 
utilizes an ecological framework that identifies macro (policy and regulatory 
institutions), meso (organizations and agencies with resources, and power) and 
micro (individuals, families and friends living in communities) interacting 
directly and indirectly. An MDSIS approach hypothesizes that change toward a 
goal will occur faster and more effectively when synchronized and supported 
across levels in a social system. MDSIS approaches by definition involve "whole" 
communities and cannot be implemented without the establishments of working 
community partnerships This paper takes a dynamic systems approach to science as 
conducted in communities, and discusses four concepts that are central to 
MDSIS--science, community, culture, and sustainability. These concepts are 
important in community based participatory research and to the targeting, 
refinement, and adaptation of enduring interventions. Consistency in their 
meaning and use can promote forward movement in the field of MDSIS, and in 
community-based prevention science.

DOI: 10.1007/s10464-009-9228-x
PMID: 19387824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2022 Nov;52(11):11571-11580. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2021.3072198. 
Epub 2022 Oct 17.

Distributed Kalman Filtering for Interconnected Dynamic Systems.

Zhang Y, Chen B, Yu L, Ho DWC.

This article is concerned with the distributed Kalman filtering problem for 
interconnected dynamic systems, where the local estimator of each subsystem is 
designed only by its own information and neighboring information. A decoupling 
strategy is developed to minimize the impact of interconnected terms on the 
estimation performance, and then the recursive and distributed Kalman filter is 
derived in the minimum mean-squared error sense. Moreover, by using Lyapunov 
criterion for linear time-varying systems, stability conditions are presented 
such that the designed estimator is bounded. Finally, a heavy duty vehicle 
platoon system is employed to show the effectiveness and advantages of the 
proposed methods.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2021.3072198
PMID: 34133293


49. J Appl Psychol. 2024 Jun;109(6):871-896. doi: 10.1037/apl0001172. Epub 2024 Jan 
25.

A dynamic systems theory of intrateam conflict contagion.

Somaraju AV(1), Griffin DJ(1), Olenick J(2), Chang CD(1), Kozlowski SWJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University.
(2)Department of Psychology, Old Dominion University.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Florida.

Recognizing the challenges that conflict poses, organizational researchers have 
invested considerable energy toward investigating the processes by which 
conflict occurs and spreads within a team. However, current theoretical 
frameworks of conflict contagion posit a static growth trajectory in which 
members become engaged in conflict and stay in conflict. While this trajectory 
is certainly possible, the broader conflict literature outside of the 
organizational sciences has shown evidence for a more varied set of potential 
trajectories of conflict contagion. To advance theory on team conflict, we 
integrate conflict research from micro-level (interpersonal) to macro-level 
(interstate) perspectives into a formal theory of intrateam conflict contagion. 
Drawing from conflict stage and social contagion theory, we theorize that team 
members move through three stages of conflict (disengaged, at-risk, engaged) at 
rates determined by four process mechanisms (faultlines, forgiveness, 
frustration, integration) such that disengaged individuals become at-risk of 
engaging in conflict, engage in conflict, then disengage, only to potentially 
become at risk of reengaging at a later point in time. Using computational 
modeling, we demonstrate the generative sufficiency of our theory to account for 
conflict trajectories observed in the broader conflict literature. To facilitate 
the interpretation of such trajectories, we present a typology of contagion 
trajectories, discuss the dynamic properties of these trajectories (e.g., 
stability, bifurcations), and provide implications for future theory building 
and practice. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2024 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/apl0001172
PMID: 38270988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2019 Apr;46(2):193-210. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-019-09629-4. Epub 2019 Mar 30.

Estimating parameters of nonlinear dynamic systems in pharmacology using chaos 
synchronization and grid search.

Pillai N(1), Schwartz SL(2), Ho T(3), Dokoumetzidis A(4), Bies R(1)(5), Freedman 
I(6).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Data-Enabled Science, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Georgetown, USA.
(3)Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Boston, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, University of Athens, Athens, 
Greece.
(5)Pharmaceutical Science, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA.
(6)Freedman Patent, Harleysville, PA, 19438, USA. freedman@freedmanpatent.com.

Bridging fundamental approaches to model optimization for pharmacometricians, 
systems pharmacologists and statisticians is a critical issue. These fields rely 
primarily on Maximum Likelihood and Extended Least Squares metrics with 
iterative estimation of parameters. Our research combines adaptive chaos 
synchronization and grid search to estimate physiological and pharmacological 
systems with emergent properties by exploring deterministic methods that are 
more appropriate and have potentially superior performance than classical 
numerical approaches, which minimize the sum of squares or maximize the 
likelihood. We illustrate these issues with an established model of cortisol in 
human with nonlinear dynamics. The model describes cortisol kinetics over time, 
including its chaotic oscillations, by a delay differential equation. We 
demonstrate that chaos synchronization helps to avoid the tendency of the 
gradient-based optimization algorithms to end up in a local minimum. The 
subsequent analysis illustrates that the hybrid adaptive chaos synchronization 
for estimation of linear parameters with coarse-to-fine grid search for optimal 
values of non-linear parameters can be applied iteratively to accurately 
estimate parameters and effectively track trajectories for a wide class of noisy 
chaotic systems.

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-019-09629-4
PMCID: PMC6491657
PMID: 30929120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Bies received funding from NCTS, NIMH, DOD, 
Takeda, Janssen and Eli Lilly through a grant to the Indiana CTSI. Immanuel 
Freedman received consulting fees from Projections Research Incorporated. 
Immanuel Freedman is an independent consultant and sole proprietor of Freedman 
Patent. Sorell Schwartz declares no conflict of interest.


51. F1000Res. 2021 Mar 8;10:193. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.51125.2. eCollection 
2021.

Mechanics of the Peripheral Auditory System: Foundations for Embodied Listening 
Using Dynamic Systems Theory and the Coupling Devices as a Metaphor.

Jactat B(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, 305-8577, Japan.

Current approaches to listening are built on standard cognitive science, which 
considers the brain as the locus of all cognitive activity. This work aims to 
investigate listening as phenomena occurring within a brain, a body 
(embodiment), and an environment (situatedness). Drawing on insights from 
physiology, acoustics, and audiology, this essay presents listening as an 
interdependent brain-body-environment construct grounded in dynamic systems 
theory. Coupling, self-organization, and attractors are the central 
characteristics of dynamic systems. This article reviews the first of these 
aspects in order to develop a fuller understanding of how embodied auditory 
perception occurs. It introduces the mind-body problem before reviewing dynamic 
systems theory and exploring the notion of coupling in human hearing by way of 
current and original analogies drawn from engineering. It posits that the 
current use of the Watt governor device as an analogy for coupling is too 
simplistic to account for the coupling phenomena in the human ear. In light of 
this review of the physiological characteristics of the peripheral auditory 
system, coupling in hearing appears more variegated than originally thought and 
accounts for the diversity of perception among individuals, a cause for 
individual variance in how the mind emerges, which in turn affects academic 
performance. Understanding the constraints and affordances of the physical ear 
with regard to incoming sound supports the embodied listening paradigm.

Copyright: © 2021 Jactat B.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.51125.2
PMCID: PMC8258707
PMID: 34249336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.


52. Turk Neurosurg. 2024;34(2):256-262. doi: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.42746-22.2.

Is The Modular Dynamic System as Effective as Classical Dynamic Systems in Long 
Segment Dynamic Thoracolumbar Stabilization?

Gunerbuyuk C(1), Akgun MY, Ozer AF.

Author information:
(1)Koc University Hospital, Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, 
Istanbul, Türkiye.

AIM: To evaluate the outcomes of dynamic stabilization in the multilevel 
degenerative spondylotic spine, and to compare the two dynamic systems (Dynesys® 
and Orthrus®) to reveal the increasing role of dynamic systems in the management 
of the degenerative spine.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 74 patients who received dynamic stabilization 
for degenerative pathologies were retrospectively analyzed. Demographic details: 
preoperative data including neurological status, pain scores, and radiology; and 
intraoperative data including blood loss, duration of surgery, complications, 
and postoperative data including the neurologic status, duration of hospital 
stay, and pain scores were examined.
RESULTS: Patients in both groups showed statistically significant improvements 
in their Visual Analog Scale and Oswestry Disability Index scores. Significant 
corrections of thoracic kyphosis (T2-T12), the sagittal vertical axis, and 
T10-L2 thoracolumbar kyphosis were obtained in our cohort (p < 0.05). A total of 
4 patients received revision surgery due to screw loosening. Patients were 
discharged after 3-4 days and mobilized on the first postoperative day.
CONCLUSION: We did not experience any serious issues in terms of stabilization 
in the cases in which we employed both systems. Our patients' clinical results 
were satisfactory in both systems. Existing systems can be used safely even in 
long-segment stabilization surgeries.

DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.42746-22.2
PMID: 38497178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:760634. doi: 10.1155/2014/760634. Epub 2014 
Apr 23.

Analysis of fractional dynamic systems.

Liu F(1), Magin R(2), Li C(3), Sikorskii A(4), Yuste SB(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, P.O. 
Box 2434, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois, 851 South Morgan 
Street, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.
(4)Department of Statistics and Probability, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(5)Departamento de Física, Universidad de Extremadura, Avenida de Elvas s/n, 
06071 Badajoz, Spain.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/760634
PMCID: PMC4032648
PMID: 24892087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Natl Sci Rev. 2024 Mar 18;11(9):nwae103. doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwae103. eCollection 
2024 Sep.

Networked dynamic systems with higher-order interactions: stability versus 
complexity.

Wang Y(1), Li A(1)(2), Wang L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Systems and Control, College of Engineering, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871, China.
(2)Center for Multi-Agent Research, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, 
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The stability of complex systems is profoundly affected by underlying 
structures, which are often modeled as networks where nodes indicate system 
components and edges indicate pairwise interactions between nodes. However, such 
networks cannot encode the overall complexity of networked systems with 
higher-order interactions among more than two nodes. Set structures provide a 
natural description of pairwise and higher-order interactions where nodes are 
grouped into multiple sets based on their shared traits. Here we derive the 
stability criteria for networked systems with higher-order interactions by 
employing set structures. In particular, we provide a simple rule showing that 
the higher-order interactions play a double-sided role in community 
stability-networked systems with set structures are stabilized if the expected 
number of common sets for any two nodes is less than one. Moreover, although 
previous knowledge suggests that more interactions (i.e. complexity) destabilize 
networked systems, we report that, with higher-order interactions, networked 
systems can be stabilized by forming more local sets. Our findings are robust 
with respect to degree heterogeneous structures, diverse equilibrium states and 
interaction types.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of China 
Science Publishing & Media Ltd.

DOI: 10.1093/nsr/nwae103
PMCID: PMC11321256
PMID: 39144749


55. J Altern Complement Med. 2012 Jul;18(7):709-18. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011.0569.

A complex, nonlinear dynamic systems perspective on Ayurveda and Ayurvedic 
research.

Rioux J(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. rioux@email.arizona.edu

Erratum in
    J Altern Complement Med. 2012 Oct;18(10):988.

The fields of complexity theory and nonlinear dynamic systems (NDS) are relevant 
for analyzing the theory and practice of Ayurvedic medicine from a Western 
scientific perspective. Ayurvedic definitions of health map clearly onto the 
tenets of both systems and complexity theory and focus primarily on the 
preservation of organismic equanimity. Health care research informed by NDS and 
complexity theory would prioritize (1) ascertaining patterns reflected in whole 
systems as opposed to isolating components; (2) relationships and dynamic 
interaction rather than static end-points; (3) transitions, change and 
cumulative effects, consistent with delivery of therapeutic packages in the 
reality of the clinical setting; and (4) simultaneously exploring both local and 
global levels of healing phenomena. NDS and complexity theory are useful in 
examining nonlinear transitions between states of health and illness; the 
qualitative nature of shifts in health status; and looking at emergent 
properties and behaviors stemming from interactions between organismic and 
environmental systems. Complexity and NDS theory also demonstrate promise for 
enhancing the suitability of research strategies applied to Ayurvedic medicine 
through utilizing core concepts such as initial conditions, emergent properties, 
fractal patterns, and critical fluctuations. In the Ayurvedic paradigm, multiple 
scales and their interactions are addressed simultaneously, necessitating data 
collection on change patterns that occur on continuums of both time and space, 
and are viewed as complementary rather than isolated and discrete. Serious 
consideration of Ayurvedic clinical understandings will necessitate new 
measurement options that can account for the relevance of both context and 
environmental factors, in terms of local biology and the processual features of 
the clinical encounter. Relevant research design issues will need to address 
clinical tailoring strategies and provide mechanisms for mapping patterns of 
change that account for the contiguous, self-replicating, cumulative, and 
synergistic theories associated with successful Ayurvedic treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2011.0569
PMCID: PMC3405450
PMID: 22830972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Jun 25;23(13):5891. doi: 10.3390/s23135891.

A Novel Data-Driven Fault Detection Method Based on Stable Kernel Representation 
for Dynamic Systems.

Wang Q(1), Peng B(2), Xie P(3), Cheng C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Changchun University of 
Technology, Changchun 130012, China.
(2)Changchun Changguang Yuanchen Microelectronic Technology Co., Ltd., Changchun 
130000, China.
(3)Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

With the steady improvement of advanced manufacturing processes and big data 
technologies, modern industrial systems have become large-scale. To enhance the 
sensitivity of fault detection (FD) and overcome the drawbacks of the 
centralized FD framework in dynamic systems, a new data-driven FD method based 
on Hellinger distance and subspace techniques is proposed for dynamic systems. 
Specifically, the proposed approach uses only system input/output data collected 
via sensor networks, and the distributed residual signals can be generated 
directly through the stable kernel representation of the process. Based on this, 
each sensor node can obtain the identical residual signal and test statistic 
through the average consensus algorithms. In addition, this paper integrates the 
Hellinger distance into the residual signal analysis for improving the FD 
performance. Finally, the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed method have 
been verified in a real multiphase flow facility.

DOI: 10.3390/s23135891
PMCID: PMC10347172
PMID: 37447748

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


57. Front Psychol. 2022 Feb 23;13:809053. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.809053. 
eCollection 2022.

"A New Hope" for Positive Psychology: A Dynamic Systems Reconceptualization of 
Hope Theory.

Colla R(1), Williams P(1), Oades LG(1), Camacho-Morles J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Wellbeing Science, Melbourne Graduate School of Education, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Erratum in
    Front Psychol. 2023 Oct 06;14:1292756. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1292756.

In this review of the central tenets of hope theory, we examine the 
meta-theoretical, theoretical, and methodological foundations of the literature 
base. Our analysis moves from a broad examination of the research landscape in 
hope theory across disciplines, to a deeper investigation of the empirical 
literature in university students. This review highlights the significant impact 
of this body of research in advancing our understanding of aspects of thriving 
characterized by hope. However, we also evidence several limitations that may 
impede the advancement of the next wave of growth in this field. To address 
these limitations, we argue for an interdisciplinary approach to expanding the 
meta-theoretical, theoretical, and methodological horizons, enabling a more 
dynamic systems approach to the study of hope. Drawing on the intersection of 
positive psychology with systems thinking, we describe a methodological approach 
that enables a deeper examination of the processes and interactions through 
which hope emerges, using an analysis of the lived experience of young people. 
It is proposed that this research agenda will bring to life an alternate story 
about the resourcefulness of our youth through their own voice, enabling us to 
leverage this in the design of more effective strategies to facilitate hope in 
the future. This research agenda provides a roadmap that will provide 
alternative methodologies that address the current limitations in the field of 
hope research and, importantly, can provide fuel to spur on the acceleration of 
the next wave of research and practice in the field of positive psychology more 
broadly.

Copyright © 2022 Colla, Williams, Oades and Camacho-Morles.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.809053
PMCID: PMC8906075
PMID: 35282244

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


58. Dev Psychol. 2017 Nov;53(11):2036-2051. doi: 10.1037/dev0000339.

A complex dynamic systems perspective on identity and its development: The 
dynamic systems model of role identity.

Kaplan A(1), Garner JK(2).

Author information:
(1)Psychological Studies in Education, College of Education, Temple University.
(2)Center for Educational Partnerships, Old Dominion University.

Current prominent models of identity face challenges in bridging across 
divergent perspectives and apparent dichotomies such as personal or 
social-collective, conscious or unconscious, and epigenetic or 
discursive-relational, and affording pursuit of research questions that allows 
integrative answers. This article presents a coherent theoretical perspective on 
the integrative nature of identity and its developmental mechanisms. Adopting 
the contextual social role as a primary unit of analysis, the Dynamic Systems 
Model of Role Identity (DSMRI) conceptualizes role identity as a Complex Dynamic 
System (CDS) anchored in action that comprises the actor's ontological and 
epistemological beliefs, purpose and goals, self-perceptions and 
self-definitions, and perceived action possibilities in the role. These system 
components are conceptualized as interdependent, and identity development is 
viewed as emergent, continuous, nonlinear, contextualized, and given to 
influences from within and without the system. The role identity itself 
constitutes an element within a multilevel hierarchy, which at the unit of 
analysis of the individual reflects a CDS of the multiple roles that constitute 
the person's psychosocial identity. Identity development involves the formation 
and restructuring of relations within and among role identities through intra- 
and interpersonal processes that are mediated by sociocognitive and cultural 
means, and framed by the context as well as by implicit dispositions. The DSMRI 
provides a framework to conceptualize and investigate the nature of the identity 
system, its development, and the relationship between identity development and 
psychological functioning at different units of-analysis, across different 
developmental stages and contexts, and using quantitative and qualitative 
methodologies. (PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2017 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/dev0000339
PMID: 29094968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Front Physiol. 2021 Jun 21;12:667859. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.667859. 
eCollection 2021.

Dynamic Systems Approach in Sensorimotor Synchronization: Adaptation to Tempo 
Step-Change.

Darabi N(1), Svensson UP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic Systems, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, Trondheim, Norway.

This paper presents a dynamic systems model of a sensorimotor synchronization 
(SMS) task. An SMS task typically gives temporally discrete human responses to 
some temporally discrete stimuli. Here, a dynamic systems modeling approach is 
applied after converting the discrete events to regularly sampled time signals. 
To collect data for model parameter fitting, a previously published pilot study 
was expanded. Three human participants took part in an experiment: to tap a 
finger on a keyboard, following a metronome which changed tempo in steps. System 
identification was used to estimate the transfer function that represented the 
relationship between the stimulus and the step response signals, assuming a 
separate linear, time-invariant system for each tempo step. Different versions 
of model complexity were investigated. As a minimum, a second-order linear 
system with delay, two poles, and one zero was needed to model the most 
important features of the tempo step response by humans, while an additional 
third pole could give a somewhat better fit to the response data. The modeling 
results revealed the behavior of the system in two distinct regimes: tempo steps 
below and above the conscious awareness of tempo change, i.e., around 12% of the 
base tempo. For the tempo steps above this value, model parameters were derived 
as linear functions of step size for the group of three participants. The 
results were interpreted in the light of known facts from other fields like SMS, 
psychoacoustics and behavioral neuroscience.

Copyright © 2021 Darabi and Svensson.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.667859
PMCID: PMC8256279
PMID: 34234688

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


60. Dev Dyn. 2015 Sep;244(9):1074-1095. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24268. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Role of transcriptional regulation in the evolution of plant phenotype: A 
dynamic systems approach.

Rodríguez-Mega E(1), Piñeyro-Nelson A(2), Gutierrez C(3), García-Ponce B(1), 
Sánchez MP(1), Zluhan-Martínez E(1), Álvarez-Buylla ER(1), Garay-Arroyo A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular, Desarrollo, Evolución y Epigenética de 
Plantas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 3er Circuito Exterior junto al 
Jardín Botánico, Ciudad Universitaria, México.
(2)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, California.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, Nicolás Cabrera 1, 
Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

A growing body of evidence suggests that alterations in transcriptional 
regulation of genes involved in modulating development are an important part of 
phenotypic evolution, and this can be documented among species and within 
populations. While the effects of differential transcriptional regulation in 
organismal development have been preferentially studied in animal systems, this 
phenomenon has also been addressed in plants. In this review, we summarize 
evidence for cis-regulatory mutations, trans-regulatory changes and epigenetic 
modifications as molecular events underlying important phenotypic alterations, 
and thus shaping the evolution of plant development. We postulate that a 
mechanistic understanding of why such molecular alterations have a key role in 
development, morphology and evolution will have to rely on dynamic models of 
complex regulatory networks that consider the concerted action of genetic and 
nongenetic components, and that also incorporate the restrictions underlying the 
genotype to phenotype mapping process. Developmental Dynamics 244:1074-1095, 
2015. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.24268
PMID: 25733163


61. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Sep 2;8:682. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00682. eCollection 
2014.

A dynamic systems view of habits.

Barrett NF(1).

Author information:
(1)Mind-Brain Group, Institute for Culture and Society, University of Navarra 
Pamplona, Spain.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00682
PMCID: PMC4151030
PMID: 25228876


62. J Chem Phys. 2016 Feb 28;144(8):084702. doi: 10.1063/1.4942198.

Application of van der Waals functionals to the calculation of dissociative 
adsorption of N2 on W(110) for static and dynamic systems.

Migliorini D(1), Nattino F(1), Kroes GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Gorlaeus Laboratories, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, P.O. 
Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden,The Netherlands.

The fundamental understanding of molecule-surface reactions is of great 
importance to heterogeneous catalysis, motivating many theoretical and 
experimental studies. Even though much attention has been dedicated to the 
dissociative chemisorption of N2 on tungsten surfaces, none of the existing 
theoretical models has been able to quantitatively reproduce experimental 
reaction probabilities for the sticking of N2 to W(110). In this work, the 
dissociative chemisorption of N2 on W(110) has been studied with both static 
electronic structure and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) calculations 
including the surface temperature effects through surface atom motion. 
Calculations have been performed using density functional theory, testing 
functionals that account for the long range van der Waals (vdW) interactions, 
which were previously only considered in dynamical calculations within the 
static surface approximation. The vdW-DF2 functional improves the description of 
the potential energy surface for N2 on W(110), returning less deep molecular 
adsorption wells and a better ratio between the barriers for the indirect 
dissociation and the desorption, as suggested by previous theoretical work and 
experimental evidence. Using the vdW-DF2 functional less trapping-mediated 
dissociation is obtained compared to results obtained with standard semi-local 
functionals such as PBE and RPBE, improving agreement with experimental data at 
E(i) = 0.9 eV. However, at E(i) = 2.287 and off-normal incidence, the vdW-DF2 
AIMD underestimates the experimental reaction probabilities, showing that also 
with the vdW-DF2 functional the N2 on W(110) interaction is not yet described 
with quantitative accuracy.

DOI: 10.1063/1.4942198
PMID: 26931713


63. Adv Sci (Weinh). 2024 Feb;11(8):e2306830. doi: 10.1002/advs.202306830. Epub 2023 
Nov 28.

Cell-Like Synthetic Supramolecular Soft Materials Realized in Multicomponent, 
Non-/Out-of-Equilibrium Dynamic Systems.

Kubota R(1), Hamachi I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School 
of Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto, 615-8510, Japan.
(2)JST-ERATO, Hamachi Innovative Molecular Technology for Neuroscience, Kyoto 
University, Nishikyo-ku, Katsura, 615-8530, Japan.

Living cells are complex, nonequilibrium supramolecular systems capable of 
independently and/or cooperatively integrating multiple bio-supramolecules to 
execute intricate physiological functions that cannot be accomplished by 
individual biomolecules. These biological design strategies offer valuable 
insights for the development of synthetic supramolecular systems with spatially 
controlled hierarchical structures, which, importantly, exhibit cell-like 
responses and functions. The next grand challenge in supramolecular chemistry is 
to control the organization of multiple types of supramolecules in a single 
system, thus integrating the functions of these supramolecules in an orthogonal 
and/or cooperative manner. In this perspective, the recent progress in 
constructing multicomponent supramolecular soft materials through the 
hybridization of supramolecules, such as self-assembled nanofibers/gels and 
coacervates, with other functional molecules, including polymer gels and enzymes 
is highlighted. Moreover, results show that these materials exhibit bioinspired 
responses to stimuli, such as bidirectional rheological responses of 
supramolecular double-network hydrogels, temporal stimulus pattern-dependent 
responses of synthetic coacervates, and 3D hydrogel patterning in response to 
reaction-diffusion processes are presented. Autonomous active soft materials 
with cell-like responses and spatially controlled structures hold promise for 
diverse applications, including soft robotics with directional motion, 
point-of-care disease diagnosis, and tissue regeneration.

© 2023 The Authors. Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/advs.202306830
PMCID: PMC10885657
PMID: 38018341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


64. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2024 Jul;55(4):518-525. doi: 10.1177/15500594241252484. Epub 
2024 May 7.

Nonlinear EEG Analysis During Motor and Cognitive Tasks in Patients With Long 
COVID: A Dynamic Systems Approach.

Morais GD(1), Appelt PA(1), Neto EM(2), Bazan R(3), Cabral AM(2), Andrade AO(2), 
Luvizutto GJ(1), Sande de Souza LAP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Physical Therapy, Federal University of Triângulo 
Mineiro, Uberaba, Brazil.
(2)Centre for Innovation and Technology Assessment in Health, Faculty of 
Electrical Engineering, Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Botucatu Medical School 
(UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil.

Introduction. Nonlinear EEG provides information about dynamic properties of the 
brain. This study aimed to compare nonlinear EEG parameters estimated from 
patients with Long COVID in different cognitive and motor tasks. Materials and 
Methods. This 12-month prospective cohort study included 83 patients with Long 
COVID: 53 symptomatic and 30 asymptomatic. Brain electrical activity was 
evaluated by EEG in 4 situations: (1) at rest, (2) during the Trail Making Test 
Part A (TMT-A), (3) during the TMT Part B (TMT-B), and (4) during a coordination 
task: the Box and Blocks Test (BBT). Nonlinear EEG parameters were estimated in 
the time domain (activity and complexity). Assessments were made at 0 to 3, 3 to 
6, and 6 to 12 months after inclusion. Results. There was a decrease in activity 
and complexity during the TMT-A and TMT-B, and an increase of these parameters 
during the BBT in both groups. There was an increase in activity at rest and 
during the TMT-A in the COVID-19 group at 0 to 3 months compared to the control, 
an increase in activity in the TMT-B in the COVID-19 group at 3 to 6 months 
compared to the control, and reduced activity and complexity at rest and during 
the TMT-A at 6 to 12 months compared to the control. Conclusion. The tasks 
followed a pattern of increased activity and complexity in cognitive tasks, 
which decreased during the coordination task. It was also observed that an 
increase in activity at rest and during cognitive tasks in the early stages, and 
reduced activity and complexity at rest and during cognitive tasks in the late 
phases of Long COVID.

DOI: 10.1177/15500594241252484
PMID: 38715353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 May 2;120(18):e2218197120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2218197120. Epub 2023 Apr 24.

Full Bayesian identification of linear dynamic systems using stable kernels.

Pillonetto G(1), Ljung L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, 35131 Padova, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, S-581 83 
Linköping, Sweden.

System identification learns mathematical models of dynamic systems starting 
from input-output data. Despite its long history, such research area is still 
extremely active. New challenges are posed by identification of complex physical 
processes given by the interconnection of dynamic systems. Examples arise in 
biology and industry, e.g., in the study of brain dynamics or sensor networks. 
In the last years, regularized kernel-based identification, with inspiration 
from machine learning, has emerged as an interesting alternative to the 
classical approach commonly adopted in the literature. In the linear setting, it 
uses the class of stable kernels to include fundamental features of physical 
dynamical systems, e.g., smooth exponential decay of impulse responses. Such 
class includes also unknown continuous parameters, called hyperparameters, which 
play a similar role as the model discrete order in controlling complexity. In 
this paper, we develop a linear system identification procedure by casting 
stable kernels in a full Bayesian framework. Our models incorporate 
hyperparameters uncertainty and consist of a mixture of dynamic systems over a 
continuum spectrum of dimensions. They are obtained by overcoming drawbacks 
related to classical Markov chain Monte Carlo schemes that, when applied to 
stable kernels, are proved to become nearly reducible (i.e., unable to 
reconstruct posteriors of interest in reasonable time). Numerical experiments 
show that full Bayes frequently outperforms the state-of-the-art results on 
typical benchmark problems. Two real applications related to brain dynamics 
(neural activity) and sensor networks are also included.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2218197120
PMCID: PMC10161125
PMID: 37094150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


66. ISRN Orthop. 2013 Jan 21;2013:183702. doi: 10.1155/2013/183702. eCollection 
2013.

Pedicle-Screw-Based Dynamic Systems and Degenerative Lumbar Diseases: 
Biomechanical and Clinical Experiences of Dynamic Fusion with Isobar TTL.

Barrey C(1), Perrin G(1), Champain S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, University Neurological Hospital P Wertheimer 
and Hospices Civils de Lyon, University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 69003 Lyon, 
France.
(2)Department of Clinical Research, Alphatecspine, 62217 Beaurains, France.

Dynamic systems in the lumbar spine are believed to reduce main fusion drawbacks 
such as pseudarthrosis, bone rarefaction, and mechanical failure. Compared to 
fusion achieved with rigid constructs, biomechanical studies underlined some 
advantages of dynamic instrumentation including increased load sharing between 
the instrumentation and interbody bone graft and stresses reduction at 
bone-to-screw interface. These advantages may result in increased fusion rates, 
limitation of bone rarefaction, and reduction of mechanical complications with 
the ultimate objective to reduce reoperations rates. However published clinical 
evidence for dynamic systems remains limited. In addition to providing 
biomechanical evaluation of a pedicle-screw-based dynamic system, the present 
study offers a long-term (average 10.2 years) insight view of the clinical 
outcomes of 18 patients treated by fusion with dynamic systems for degenerative 
lumbar spine diseases. The findings outline significant and stable symptoms 
relief, absence of implant-related complications, no revision surgery, and few 
adjacent segment degenerative changes. In spite of sample limitations, this is 
the first long-term report of outcomes of dynamic fusion that opens an 
interesting perspective for clinical outcomes of dynamic systems that need to be 
explored at larger scale.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/183702
PMCID: PMC4045289
PMID: 25031874


67. Nat Commun. 2018 May 4;9(1):1803. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04241-5.

Bayesian model selection for complex dynamic systems.

Mark C(1), Metzner C(2), Lautscham L(2), Strissel PL(3), Strick R(3), Fabry 
B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, 91052, Germany. christoph.mark@fau.de.
(2)Department of Physics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen, 91052, Germany.
(3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Erlangen, 91054, Germany.

Time series generated by complex systems like financial markets and the earth's 
atmosphere often represent superstatistical random walks: on short time scales, 
the data follow a simple low-level model, but the model parameters are not 
constant and can fluctuate on longer time scales according to a high-level 
model. While the low-level model is often dictated by the type of the data, the 
high-level model, which describes how the parameters change, is unknown in most 
cases. Here we present a computationally efficient method to infer the time 
course of the parameter variations from time-series with short-range 
correlations. Importantly, this method evaluates the model evidence to 
objectively select between competing high-level models. We apply this method to 
detect anomalous price movements in financial markets, characterize cancer cell 
invasiveness, identify historical policies relevant for working safety in coal 
mines, and compare different climate change scenarios to forecast global 
warming.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04241-5
PMCID: PMC5935699
PMID: 29728622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


68. Res Child Adolesc Psychopathol. 2024 Jan;52(1):141-154. doi: 
10.1007/s10802-023-01102-8. Epub 2023 Jul 17.

Coercive Parent-Adolescent Interactions Predict Substance use and Antisocial 
Behaviors Through Early Adulthood: A Dynamic Systems Perspective.

Zhang J(1), Hanson AN(2), Piehler TF(2), Ha T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Social Science, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, 
290 McNeal Hall, 1985 Buford Avenue, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA. zhan4936@umn.edu.
(2)Department of Family Social Science, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, 
290 McNeal Hall, 1985 Buford Avenue, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, USA.

This study revisits the association between coercive parent-adolescent 
interactions and adolescent externalizing behaviors. Specifically, we 
investigate the moment-to-moment coercive exchanges between parents and 
adolescents and how these dynamic processes map to the long-term development of 
substance use and antisocial behavior from middle adolescence to early 
adulthood. We collected videotaped observations with 794 adolescents (ages 16-17 
years) and their parents during interactions and coded their real-time 
behavioral exchanges. State Space Grid analyses were used to measure the 
proportion of time in which each parent-adolescent dyad engaged in the Dyadic 
Coercion region as an indicator of rigidity in dyadic coercion. We also measured 
adolescents' substance use and antisocial behavior at ages 16-17, ages 18-19, 
and ages 21-22. The enduring impact of parent-adolescent coercive interaction on 
substance use and antisocial behavior was tested using categorical latent growth 
curve models and path models. Adolescents with more coercive interactions with 
parents showed higher rates of increase in alcohol use and higher levels of 
antisocial behavior through early adulthood. The findings highlight the unique 
contribution of using intensive data to understand coercive interactions on a 
micro-timescale and how these dynamics influence long-term development in 
externalizing behaviors. Implications for intervention studies are discussed.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s10802-023-01102-8
PMID: 37458901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 2;10(1):3780. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60606-1.

Attractor Ranked Radial Basis Function Network: A Nonparametric Forecasting 
Approach for Chaotic Dynamic Systems.

Masnadi-Shirazi M(1), Subramaniam S(2).

Author information:
(1)University of California San Diego, Department of Bioengineering, La Jolla, 
CA, 92093, USA.
(2)University of California San Diego, Departments of Bioengineering and 
Computer Science & Engineering, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. shankar@ucsd.edu.

The curse of dimensionality has long been a hurdle in the analysis of complex 
data in areas such as computational biology, ecology and econometrics. In this 
work, we present a forecasting algorithm that exploits the dimensionality of 
data in a nonparametric autoregressive framework. The main idea is that the 
dynamics of a chaotic dynamical system consisting of multiple time-series can be 
reconstructed using a combination of different variables. This nonlinear 
autoregressive algorithm uses multivariate attractors reconstructed as the 
inputs of a neural network to predict the future. We show that our approach, 
attractor ranked radial basis function network (AR-RBFN) provides a better 
forecast than that obtained using other model-free approaches as well as 
univariate and multivariate autoregressive models using radial basis function 
networks. We demonstrate this for simulated ecosystem models and a mesocosm 
experiment. By taking advantage of dimensionality, we show that AR-RBFN 
overcomes the shortcomings of noisy and short time-series data.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60606-1
PMCID: PMC7052196
PMID: 32123218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


70. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2017 Mar;51(1):76-93. doi: 10.1007/s12124-016-9359-1.

Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) as an Emergent System: A Dynamic Systems 
Theory Perspective.

Karimi-Aghdam S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Languages, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. 
saeed.karimi.aghdam@jyu.fi.

This paper sets out to present a novel construal of one of the notions of 
Vygotskian cultural-historical theory viz., zone of proximal development (ZPD) 
drawing upon dynamic systems theory. The principal thesis maintains that ZDP is 
an emergent and dynamic system which is engendered by a dialectical 
concatenation of psychogenesic and sociogenesic facets of human development over 
time. It is reasoned that Vygotskian cultural-historical theory of human 
development, by invoking dialectical logic, has transcended Cartesian substance 
dualism and in turn has proffered a monistic and process-anchored ontology for 
emerging becoming of human consciousness. Likewise, it is contended that dynamic 
systems theory, having assumed fluent flux of reality with a capital R as its 
ontological axiom, entails a consilience of cognitive and contextual conceptual 
schemes to describe, explain, and optimize human development. The paper 
concludes by drawing some interpretive conclusions in regard to ZPD from dynamic 
systems theory perspective.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-016-9359-1
PMID: 27510796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Complexity. 2020 Apr 2;2020:6403641. doi: 10.1155/2020/6403641.

Separable Nonlinear Least-Squares Parameter Estimation for Complex Dynamic 
Systems.

Dattner I(1), Ship H(1), Voit EO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Haifa, 199 Aba Khoushy Ave., Mount 
Carmel, Haifa 3498838, Israel.
(2)The Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia 
Institute of Technology and Emory University, 950 Atlantic Drive, Atslanta, GA 
30332-2000, USA.

Nonlinear dynamic models are widely used for characterizing processes that 
govern complex biological pathway systems. Over the past decade, validation and 
further development of these models became possible due to data collected via 
high-throughput experiments using methods from molecular biology. While these 
data are very beneficial, they are typically incomplete and noisy, which renders 
the inference of parameter values for complex dynamic models challenging. 
Fortunately, many biological systems have embedded linear mathematical features, 
which may be exploited, thereby improving fits and leading to better convergence 
of optimization algorithms. In this paper, we explore options of inference for 
dynamic models using a novel method of separable nonlinear least-squares 
optimization and compare its performance to the traditional nonlinear 
least-squares method. The numerical results from extensive simulations suggest 
that the proposed approach is at least as accurate as the traditional nonlinear 
least-squares, but usually superior, while also enjoying a substantial reduction 
in computational time.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/6403641
PMCID: PMC8188859
PMID: 34113070

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.


72. Br J Sports Med. 2019 Oct;53(19):1214-1220. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097395. 
Epub 2018 Apr 19.

From microscopic to macroscopic sports injuries. Applying the complex dynamic 
systems approach to sports medicine: a narrative review.

Pol R(1), Hristovski R(2), Medina D(3), Balague N(4).

Author information:
(1)Futbol Club Barcelona. Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, INEFC, 
Universitat de Lleida (UdL), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, Faculty of Physical Education, Sport 
and Health, Saints Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia (the former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia).
(3)Futbol Club Barcelona. Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(4)Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, INEFC, Universitat de Barcelona 
(UB), Barcelona, Spain.

A better understanding of how sports injuries occur in order to improve their 
prevention is needed for medical, economic, scientific and sports success 
reasons. This narrative review aims to explain the mechanisms that underlie the 
occurrence of sports injuries, and an innovative approach for their prevention 
on the basis of complex dynamic systems approach. First, we explain the 
multilevel organisation of living systems and how function of the 
musculoskeletal system may be impaired. Second, we use both, a constraints 
approach and a connectivity hypothesis to explain why and how the susceptibility 
to sports injuries may suddenly increase. Constraints acting at multiple levels 
and timescales replace the static and linear concept of risk factors, and the 
connectivity hypothesis brings an understanding of how the accumulation of 
microinjuries creates a macroscopic non-linear effect, that is, how a common 
motor action may trigger a severe injury. Finally, a recap of practical examples 
and challenges for the future illustrates how the complex dynamic systems 
standpoint, changing the way of thinking about sports injuries, offers 
innovative ideas for improving sports injury prevention.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2019. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097395
PMID: 29674346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


73. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Mar 20;23(6):3260. doi: 10.3390/s23063260.

Anomaly Detection and Concept Drift Adaptation for Dynamic Systems: A General 
Method with Practical Implementation Using an Industrial Collaborative Robot.

Kermenov R(1), Nabissi G(1), Longhi S(1), Bonci A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ingegneria dell'Informazione (DII), Università Politecnica 
delle Marche, 60131 Ancona, Italy.

Industrial collaborative robots (cobots) are known for their ability to operate 
in dynamic environments to perform many different tasks (since they can be 
easily reprogrammed). Due to their features, they are largely used in flexible 
manufacturing processes. Since fault diagnosis methods are generally applied to 
systems where the working conditions are bounded, problems arise when defining 
condition monitoring architecture, in terms of setting absolute criteria for 
fault analysis and interpreting the meanings of detected values since working 
conditions may vary. The same cobot can be easily programmed to accomplish more 
than three or four tasks in a single working day. The extreme versatility of 
their use complicates the definition of strategies for detecting abnormal 
behavior. This is because any variation in working conditions can result in a 
different distribution of the acquired data stream. This phenomenon can be 
viewed as concept drift (CD). CD is defined as the change in data distribution 
that occurs in dynamically changing and nonstationary systems. Therefore, in 
this work, we propose an unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) method that is 
capable of operating under CD. This solution aims to identify data changes 
coming from different working conditions (the concept drift) or a system 
degradation (failure) and, at the same time, can distinguish between the two 
cases. Additionally, once a concept drift is detected, the model can be adapted 
to the new conditions, thereby avoiding misinterpretation of the data. This 
paper concludes with a proof of concept (POC) that tests the proposed method on 
an industrial collaborative robot.

DOI: 10.3390/s23063260
PMCID: PMC10052046
PMID: 36991969

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


74. Clin Orthop Surg. 2017 Sep;9(3):310-316. doi: 10.4055/cios.2017.9.3.310. Epub 
2017 Aug 4.

Lumbar Single-Level Dynamic Stabilization with Semi-Rigid and Full Dynamic 
Systems: A Retrospective Clinical and Radiological Analysis of 71 Patients.

Ozer AF(1), Oktenoglu T(1), Egemen E(1), Sasani M(1), Yilmaz A(2), Erbulut 
DU(3), Yaman O(1), Suzer T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Koc University School of Medicine, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Mustafa Kemal University, Hatay, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: This study compares the clinical and radiological results of three 
most commonly used dynamic stabilization systems in the field of orthopedic 
surgery.
METHODS: A total of 71 patients underwent single-level posterior transpedicular 
dynamic stabilization between 2011 and 2014 due to lumbar degenerative disc 
disease. Three different dynamic systems used include: (1) the Dynesys system; 
(2) a dynamic screw with a PEEK rod; and (3) a full dynamic system (a dynamic 
screw with a dynamic rod; BalanC). The mean patient age was 45.8 years. The mean 
follow-up was 29.7 months. Clinical and radiological data were obtained for each 
patient preoperatively and at 6, 12, and 24 months of follow-up.
RESULTS: Clinical outcomes were significantly improved in all patients. There 
were no significant differences in the radiological outcomes among the groups 
divided according to the system used. Screw loosening was detected in 2 
patients, and 1 patient developed screw breakage. All patients with screw 
loosening or breakage underwent revision surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Each procedure offered satisfactory outcome regardless of which 
system was applied.

DOI: 10.4055/cios.2017.9.3.310
PMCID: PMC5567026
PMID: 28861198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.


75. Child Dev Perspect. 2011 Dec;5(4):260-266. doi: 
10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00194.x.

Twenty years and going strong: A dynamic systems revolution in motor and 
cognitive development.

Spencer JP(1), Perone S, Buss AT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Delta Center, University of Iowa.

This article reviews the major contributions of dynamic systems theory in 
advancing thinking about development, the empirical insights the theory has 
generated, and the key challenges for the theory on the horizon. The first 
section discusses the emergence of dynamic systems theory in developmental 
science, the core concepts of the theory, and the resonance it has with other 
approaches that adopt a systems metatheory. The second section reviews the work 
of Esther Thelen and colleagues, who revolutionized how researchers think about 
the field of motor development. It also reviews recent extensions of this work 
to the domain of cognitive development. Here, the focus is on dynamic field 
theory, a formal, neurally grounded approach that has yielded novel insights 
into the embodied nature of cognition. The final section proposes that the key 
challenge on the horizon is to formally specify how interactions among multiple 
levels of analysis interact across multiple time scales to create developmental 
change.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00194.x
PMCID: PMC3224018
PMID: 22125575


76. Behav Brain Sci. 2010 Jun;33(2-3):174-5. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X10000828.

Networks as complex dynamic systems: applications to clinical and developmental 
psychology and psychopathology.

van Geert PL(1), Steenbeek HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, The Heymans Institute, University of 
Groningen, 9712 TS Groningen, The Netherlands. paul@vangeert.nl

Cramer et al.'s article is an example of the fruitful application of complex 
dynamic systems theory. We extend their approach with examples from our own work 
on development and developmental psychopathology and address three issues: (1) 
the level of aggregation of the network, (2) the required research methodology, 
and (3) the clinical and educational application of dynamic network thinking.

DOI: 10.1017/S0140525X10000828
PMID: 20584392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2017 Nov 15;109S:S27-S31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.05.023. Epub 
2017 May 12.

Non-maturational covariates for dynamic systems pharmacology models in neonates, 
infants, and children: Filling the gaps beyond developmental pharmacology.

Allegaert K(1), Simons SHP(2), Tibboel D(3), Krekels EH(4), Knibbe CA(5), van 
den Anker JN(6).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care and Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Development and 
Regeneration KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.simons@erasmusmc.nl.
(3)Intensive Care and Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Division of Pharmacology, Leiden Academic Center for Drug Research, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Division of Pharmacology, Leiden Academic Center for Drug Research, Leiden, 
the Netherlands; Department of Clinical Pharmacy, St. Antonius Hospital, 
Nieuwegein, the Netherlands.
(6)Intensive Care and Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Division of Clinical 
Pharmacology, Children's National Health System, Washington, DC, USA; Division 
of Pediatric Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, University of Basel Children's 
Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Pharmacokinetics and -dynamics show important changes throughout childhood. 
Studies on the different maturational processes that influence developmental 
pharmacology have been used to create population PK/PD models that can yield 
individualized pediatric drug dosages. These models were subsequently translated 
to semi-physiologically or physiology-based PK (PBPK) models that support 
predictions in pediatric patient cohorts and other special populations. Although 
these translational efforts are crucial, these models should be further improved 
towards individual patient predictions by including knowledge on 
non-maturational covariates. These efforts are needed to ultimately get to 
systems pharmacology models for children. These models take developmental 
changes relating to the pediatric dynamical system into account but also other 
aspects that may be of importance such as abnormal body composition, 
pharmacogenetics, critical illness and inflammatory status.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.05.023
PMID: 28506866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Offender Ther Comp Criminol. 2018 Sep;62(12):3746-3774. doi: 
10.1177/0306624X17750353. Epub 2018 Jan 5.

Tests of the Attachment and Developmental Dynamic Systems Theory of Crime 
(ADDSTOC): Toward a Differential RDoC Diagnostic and Treatment Approach.

Lindberg MA(1), Zeid D(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Marshall University, Huntington, WV, USA.
(2)2 The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, USA.

The Attachment and Developmental Dynamic Systems Theory of Crime was tested on 
206 male inmates. They completed measures tapping attachments, clinical issues, 
adverse childhood events, peer crime, and crime addictions. A significant path 
model was found, going from insecure parental attachments to adverse childhood 
events, and then on to the behavioral crime addiction and criminal peers scales. 
Peer crime was also predicted by insecure parent attachments and the crime 
addiction scale. Finally, the crime addiction, peer crime, and insecure parental 
attachment scales predicted frequencies of criminal behavior. The model also fit 
a sample of 239 female inmates. The notions of crime addiction, in this context 
of adverse events and insecure parental attachments, offered newer and more 
powerful explanations than previously offered by social learning theories on why 
some individuals are more likely to associate with peers engaging in criminal 
behavior, and also how these combine to predict degrees of criminal behavior. By 
moving beyond main effects models, it was found that a focus on systems of 
interactions was robust in theory and application. However, profile data from 
the Attachment and Clinical Issues Questionnaire showed that individual 
differences in Research Domain Criteria diagnoses are fundamental to treatment 
settings. Such approaches to reducing rates of recidivism and substance abuse 
should also enhance outcomes in many domains, including HIV prevention, costs to 
health care, and at the same time increase overall public safety.

DOI: 10.1177/0306624X17750353
PMID: 29303015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. ISA Trans. 2023 Mar;134:256-267. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.08.031. Epub 2022 
Sep 5.

Measurement-outlier robust Kalman filter for discrete-time dynamic systems.

Javanfar E(1), Rahmani M(2), Moaveni B(3).

Author information:
(1)Electrical Engineering Department, Imam-Khomeini International University, 
Qazvin, Iran.
(2)Electrical Engineering Department, Imam-Khomeini International University, 
Qazvin, Iran. Electronic address: mrahmani@eng.ikiu.ac.ir.
(3)Electrical Engineering Department, K. N. Toosi University of Technology, 
Tehran, Iran.

This paper proposes a recursive filter for discrete-time linear dynamic systems 
subject to output outliers or heavy-tailed noises. First, we introduce a weight 
matrix in the conventional MAP estimation. It is shown that this matrix plays an 
influential role in the innovation whitening and asymptotic variance of the 
modified MAP estimation and, consequently, can be used in outlier detection. 
Then, we propose two different constrained optimization problems to obtain this 
weight. These constraints, stemming from environmental noise characteristics, 
help to obtain the weight matrix more precisely, which increases the filtering 
performance significantly. In the first approach, we introduce a convex 
optimization problem to minimize the estimation upper bound of the error 
covariance matrix. The second approach converts the modified MAP estimation to a 
min-min optimization problem with a concave cost function. Consequently, to 
reduce the effect of outliers in estimation, a semidefinite program (SDP) is 
proposed for outlier detection. At last, simulation results show the 
effectiveness and verify the performance of the proposed filter for dynamic 
systems in the presence of measurement outliers.

Copyright © 2022 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.08.031
PMID: 36127183

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


80. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e86696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086696. 
eCollection 2014.

Automated design of complex dynamic systems.

Hermans M(1), Schrauwen B(1), Bienstman P(2), Dambre J(1).

Author information:
(1)ELIS department, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)INTEC department, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Several fields of study are concerned with uniting the concept of computation 
with that of the design of physical systems. For example, a recent trend in 
robotics is to design robots in such a way that they require a minimal control 
effort. Another example is found in the domain of photonics, where recent 
efforts try to benefit directly from the complex nonlinear dynamics to achieve 
more efficient signal processing. The underlying goal of these and similar 
research efforts is to internalize a large part of the necessary computations 
within the physical system itself by exploiting its inherent non-linear 
dynamics. This, however, often requires the optimization of large numbers of 
system parameters, related to both the system's structure as well as its 
material properties. In addition, many of these parameters are subject to 
fabrication variability or to variations through time. In this paper we apply a 
machine learning algorithm to optimize physical dynamic systems. We show that 
such algorithms, which are normally applied on abstract computational entities, 
can be extended to the field of differential equations and used to optimize an 
associated set of parameters which determine their behavior. We show that 
machine learning training methodologies are highly useful in designing robust 
systems, and we provide a set of both simple and complex examples using models 
of physical dynamical systems. Interestingly, the derived optimization method is 
intimately related to direct collocation a method known in the field of optimal 
control. Our work suggests that the application domains of both machine learning 
and optimal control have a largely unexplored overlapping area which envelopes a 
novel design methodology of smart and highly complex physical systems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086696
PMCID: PMC3908928
PMID: 24497969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


81. J Sch Psychol. 2025 Jun;110:101470. doi: 10.1016/j.jsp.2025.101470. Epub 2025 
May 24.

A complex dynamic systems perspective on the roles of culture, context, and 
identity in psychoeducational interventions.

Kaplan A(1), Garner JK(2), Whitney S(3).

Author information:
(1)Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
akaplan@temple.edu.
(2)Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA. Electronic address: 
jkgarner@odu.edu.
(3)University of Missouri, MO, USA. Electronic address: whitneyst@missouri.edu.

In this paper, we apply a Complex Dynamic Systems (CDS) perspective to 
reconsider current causal assumptions about educational contexts and the roles 
of culture, context, and identity in psychoeducational interventions. Focusing 
on phenomena such as teachers' and students' engagement, motivation, 
development, and wellbeing, we emphasize the phenomenon's conceptual 
unit-of-analysis for interventions as "the agent(s) in their authentic lived 
environment." Different from assumptions about causality in prevalent approaches 
to designing and evaluating interventions (e.g., RCT) as cross-contextual, 
independent, and mostly linear, a CDS perspective affords accounting for 
contextual and treatment-related heterogeneity and dynamism by viewing causal 
processes as emergent, non-deterministic, and changing due to factors' 
inter-dependence, shifting stability, and contextual embeddedness. We describe a 
CDS model of culturally and contextually based identity, motivation, and 
action-the Dynamic Systems Model of Role Identity (DSMRI)-to illustrate the 
application of CDS to psychoeducational interventions. We exemplify this 
perspective's implications for designing and evaluating psychoeducational 
interventions as design-based case studies that ground analyses at the 
unit-of-analysis of the "agent(s)-in-context."

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsp.2025.101470
PMID: 40506174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Comput Intell Neurosci. 2023 Jul 26;2023:9854161. doi: 10.1155/2023/9854161. 
eCollection 2023.

Retracted: Applying Dynamic Systems to Social Media by Using Controlling 
Stability.

Intelligence And Neuroscience C.

Retraction of
    Comput Intell Neurosci. 2022 Jan 31;2022:4569879. doi: 10.1155/2022/4569879.

[This retracts the article DOI: 10.1155/2022/4569879.].

Copyright © 2023 Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/9854161
PMCID: PMC10396764
PMID: 37538670


83. Emotion. 2007 Aug;7(3):628-37. doi: 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.628.

Frameworks for understanding emotions and their development: functionalist and 
dynamic systems approaches.

Witherington DC(1), Crichton JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, 
USA. dcwither@unm.edu

In recent years, both functionalist and dynamic systems approaches have assumed 
increasing prominence in the study of emotion and its development, but the 
similarities and differences between these perspectives remain largely 
unexplored and open to more systematic examination. In this article, the authors 
argue that both approaches share a systems view of emotion and regard emotion in 
relational, process terms. However, each approach adopts a distinct level of 
analysis and distinct types of explanation for emotion and its development. 
Whereas the functionalist approach appeals to formal and final causes to explain 
patterning in emotion at the level of organism-environment relations, the 
dynamic systems approach appeals to efficient and material causes to explain 
emotion at the specific content level of behavior in context. Whether these 
approaches complement or conflict with one another depends on the extent to 
which the dynamic systems approach admits abstraction into its explanatory 
framework. A. Fogel's social process theory and M. D. Lewis' approach to emotion 
self-organization are discussed in this regard.

((c) 2007 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.628
PMID: 17683218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biol Open. 2024 Jan 15;13(1):bio060087. doi: 10.1242/bio.060087. Epub 2024 Jan 
5.

The influence of carbon dioxide on cerebral metabolism and oxygen consumption: 
combining multimodal monitoring with dynamic systems modelling.

Highton D(1)(2), Caldwell M(3), Tachtsidis I(3), Elwell CE(3), Smith M(1)(3), 
Cooper CE(4).

Author information:
(1)Neurocritical Care Unit, University College London Hospitals, National 
Hospital for Neurology & Neurosurgery, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)Princess Alexandra Hospital Southside Clinical Unit, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4102, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, Malet Place Engineering Building, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)School of Sport, Rehabilitation and Exercise Sciences, University of Essex, 
Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK.

Hypercapnia increases cerebral blood flow. The effects on cerebral metabolism 
remain incompletely understood although studies show an oxidation of cytochrome 
c oxidase, Complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Systems modelling 
was combined with previously published non-invasive measurements of cerebral 
tissue oxygenation, cerebral blood flow, and cytochrome c oxidase redox state to 
evaluate any metabolic effects of hypercapnia. Cerebral tissue oxygen saturation 
and cytochrome oxidase redox state were measured with broadband near infrared 
spectroscopy and cerebral blood flow velocity with transcranial Doppler 
ultrasound. Data collected during 5-min hypercapnia in awake human volunteers 
were analysed using a Fick model to determine changes in brain oxygen 
consumption and a mathematical model of cerebral hemodynamics and metabolism 
(BrainSignals) to inform on mechanisms. Either a decrease in metabolic substrate 
supply or an increase in metabolic demand modelled the cytochrome oxidation in 
hypercapnia. However, only the decrease in substrate supply explained both the 
enzyme redox state changes and the Fick-calculated drop in brain oxygen 
consumption. These modelled outputs are consistent with previous reports of CO2 
inhibition of mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase and isocitrate 
dehydrogenase. Hypercapnia may have physiologically significant effects 
suppressing oxidative metabolism in humans and perturbing mitochondrial 
signalling pathways in health and disease.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.060087
PMCID: PMC10810564
PMID: 38180242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.


85. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Comput Intell Neurosci. 2022 Jan 31;2022:4569879. doi: 10.1155/2022/4569879. 
eCollection 2022.

Applying Dynamic Systems to Social Media by Using Controlling Stability.

Abdullah Hamad A(1), Thivagar ML(1), Bader Alazzam M(2), Alassery F(3), Hajjej 
F(4), Shihab AA(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, India.
(2)Faculty of Computer Science and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Amman, 
Jordan.
(3)Department of Computer Engineering, College of Computers and Information 
Technology, Taif University, P.O. Box 11099, Taif 21944, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Information Systems, College of Computer and Information 
Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 
11671, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Mathematics Department, Education for Pure Sciences College, Tikrit 
University, Tikrit, Iraq.

Retraction in
    Comput Intell Neurosci. 2023 Jul 26;2023:9854161. doi: 10.1155/2023/9854161.

This study focuses on hybrid synchronization, a new synchronization phenomenon 
in which one element of the system is synced with another part of the system 
that is not allowing full synchronization and nonsynchronization to coexist in 
the system. When limt ⟶ ∞Y - αX = 0 , where Y and X are the state vectors of the 
drive and response systems, respectively, and Wan (α = ∓1)), the two systems' 
hybrid synchronization phenomena are realized mathematically. Nonlinear control 
is used to create four alternative error stabilization controllers that are 
based on two basic tools: Lyapunov stability theory and the linearization 
approach.

Copyright © 2022 Abdulsattar Abdullah Hamad et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/4569879
PMCID: PMC8872657
PMID: 35222627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


86. J Comput Biol. 2018 Sep;25(9):987-996. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2018.0062. Epub 2018 Jun 
15.

Estimation of Dynamic Systems for Gene Regulatory Networks from Dependent 
Time-Course Data.

Kim Y(1), Kim J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, Sungkyunkwan University , Seoul, Korea.

Dynamic system consisting of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) is a 
well-known tool for describing dynamic nature of gene regulatory networks 
(GRNs), and the dynamic features of GRNs are usually captured through 
time-course gene expression data. Owing to high-throughput technologies, 
time-course gene expression data have complex structures such as 
heteroscedasticity, correlations between genes, and time dependence. Since gene 
experiments typically yield highly noisy data with small sample size, for a more 
accurate prediction of the dynamics, the complex structures should be taken into 
account in ODE models. Hence, this study proposes an ODE model considering such 
data structures and a fast and stable estimation method for the ODE parameters 
based on the generalized profiling approach with data smoothing techniques. The 
proposed method also provides statistical inference for the ODE estimator and it 
is applied to a zebrafish retina cell network.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2018.0062
PMID: 29905491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 12;7(1):13015. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13468-z.

Developmental Emergence of Sparse Coding: A Dynamic Systems Approach.

Rahmati V(1), Kirmse K(2), Holthoff K(2), Schwabe L(3), Kiebel SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01187, Dresden, 
Germany. vahid.rahmati@tu-dresden.de.
(2)Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, University Hospital Jena, 07747, Jena, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, University of 
Rostock, 18059, Rostock, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01187, Dresden, 
Germany.

During neocortical development, network activity undergoes a dramatic transition 
from largely synchronized, so-called cluster activity, to a relatively sparse 
pattern around the time of eye-opening in rodents. Biophysical mechanisms 
underlying this sparsification phenomenon remain poorly understood. Here, we 
present a dynamic systems modeling study of a developing neural network that 
provides the first mechanistic insights into sparsification. We find that the 
rest state of immature networks is strongly affected by the dynamics of a 
transient, unstable state hidden in their firing activities, allowing these 
networks to either be silent or generate large cluster activity. We address how, 
and which, specific developmental changes in neuronal and synaptic parameters 
drive sparsification. We also reveal how these changes refine the information 
processing capabilities of an in vivo developing network, mainly by showing a 
developmental reduction in the instability of network's firing activity, an 
effective availability of inhibition-stabilized states, and an emergence of 
spontaneous attractors and state transition mechanisms. Furthermore, we 
demonstrate the key role of GABAergic transmission and depressing glutamatergic 
synapses in governing the spatiotemporal evolution of cluster activity. These 
results, by providing a strong link between experimental observations and model 
behavior, suggest how adult sparse coding networks may emerge developmentally.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-13468-z
PMCID: PMC5638906
PMID: 29026183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


88. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 1;331(1):11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.09.001. 
Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Glucocorticoids and circadian clock control of cell proliferation: at the 
interface between three dynamic systems.

Dickmeis T(1), Foulkes NS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
(KIT), Campus Nord, Postfach 3640, D-76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. 
thomas.dickmeis@kit.edu

The circadian clock, an endogenous timekeeper that regulates daily rhythms of 
physiology, also influences the dynamic release of glucocorticoids. The release 
of glucocorticoids is characteristically pulsatile and is further modulated in a 
circadian fashion. A circadian pacemaker in the brain regulates daily rhythms of 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic nervous system activity that 
both influence glucocorticoid release from the adrenal gland. This systemic 
regulation interacts with rhythms in the adrenal gland itself that are driven by 
its own circadian clock. One function of glucocorticoids is the regulation of 
cell proliferation. Depending on the tissue, this can involve both negative and 
positive regulation of a variety of processes, including cell differentiation 
and cell death. Cell proliferation is also under circadian control, and recent 
evidence suggests that this regulation may involve glucocorticoid signalling. 
Here, we review the dynamic processes participating in the interplay between the 
circadian clock, glucocorticoids and cell proliferation, and we discuss the 
potential implications for therapy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.09.001
PMID: 20833224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2023 Jul;53(7):4259-4269. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3163301. 
Epub 2023 Jun 15.

Fault Detection for Nonlinear Dynamic Systems With Consideration of Modeling 
Errors: A Data-Driven Approach.

Chen H, Li L, Shang C, Huang B.

This article is concerned with data-driven realization of fault detection (FD) 
for nonlinear dynamic systems. In order to identify and parameterize nonlinear 
Hammerstein models using dynamic input and output data, a stacked neural 
network-aided canonical variate analysis (SNNCVA) method is proposed, based on 
which a data-driven residual generator is formed. Then, the threshold used for 
FD purposes is obtained via quantiles-based learning, where both estimation 
errors and approximation errors are considered. Compared with the existing work, 
the main novelties of this study include: 1) SNNCVA provides a new 
parameterization strategy for nonlinear Hammerstein systems by utilizing input 
and output data only; 2) the associated residual generator can ensure FD 
performance where both the system model and its nonlinearity are unknown; and 3) 
with consideration of modeling-induced errors, the quantiles are invoked and 
used to provide a reliable FD threshold in situations where only limited samples 
are available. Studies on a nonlinear hot rolling mill process demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed method.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3163301
PMID: 35417371


90. Cogn Sci. 2016 Mar;40(2):496-512. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12239. Epub 2015 Apr 10.

Making Sense of Dynamic Systems: How Our Understanding of Stocks and Flows 
Depends on a Global Perspective.

Fischer H(1), Gonzalez C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Heidelberg University.
(2)Dynamic Decision Making Laboratory, Department of Social and Decision 
Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University.

Stocks and flows (SF) are building blocks of dynamic systems: Stocks change 
through inflows and outflows, such as our bank balance changing with withdrawals 
and deposits, or atmospheric CO2 with absorptions and emissions. However, people 
make systematic errors when trying to infer the behavior of dynamic systems, 
termed SF failure, whose cognitive explanations are yet unknown. We argue that 
SF failure appears when people focus on specific system elements (local 
processing), rather than on the system structure and gestalt (global 
processing). Using a standard SF task (n = 148), SF failure decreased by (a) a 
global as opposed to local task format; (b) individual global as opposed to 
local processing styles; and (c) global as opposed to local perceptual priming. 
These results converge toward local processing as an explanation for SF failure. 
We discuss theoretical and practical implications on the connections between the 
scope of attention and understanding of dynamic systems.

Copyright © 2015 Cognitive Science Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/cogs.12239
PMID: 25864456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hum Mov Sci. 2022 Aug;84:102974. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2022.102974. Epub 2022 Jul 
6.

Embodied transfer of knowledge using dynamic systems concepts in high school: A 
preliminary study.

Almarcha MC(1), Martínez P(2), Balagué N(3), Hristovski R(4).

Author information:
(1)Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, Institut Nacional d'Educació Fisica 
de Catalunya (INEFC), University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut d'Educació Secundària Maria Rúbies, Lleida, Spain.
(3)Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, Institut Nacional d'Educació Fisica 
de Catalunya (INEFC), University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: nataliabalague@gmail.com.
(4)Complex Systems in Sport Research Group, Faculty of Physical Education, Sport 
and Health, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia.

The transfer of knowledge among academic subjects and linking different 
phenomena are crucial education competencies in Bloom's taxonomy of learning 
goals. From another side, modern cognitive science defines cognition and 
learning as embodied. The Synthetic Understanding through Movement Analogies 
(SUMA) educational framework proposes embodied learning of general scientific 
principles and concepts and knowledge transfer among academic disciplines 
encompassing sciences, humanities and arts. Accordingly, this research aimed to 
evaluate the educational potential of teaching a set of Dynamic Systems Theory 
(DST) concepts through body movement experiences in first-grade high school 
students. Five classes of high school students (n = 71; 23 girls, 46 boys and 2 
non-binaries, aged 12-13 y.) followed a four-week intervention addressed to 
teaching five DST concepts (order parameter, stability, control parameter, 
instability and phase transition) and transfer them to biological and social 
phenomena. Students followed four teaching phases: a) embodied experience, b) 
reflective observation of the experience, c) abstract conceptualization of the 
experience using the five general concepts, d) transfer of knowledge through the 
concepts to different phenomena from biological and social science academic 
subjects. Students' integration and transfer of knowledge abilities were 
evaluated pre- and post-intervention through a questionnaire and three 
open-ended questions. Results were compared using non-parametric Wilcoxon 
matched-pairs test and effect sizes were calculated through PS dep measures. 
Students' abilities to integrate and transfer knowledge increased 
post-intervention (Z = 7.322, p < 0.0001, PSdep = 1). The effect of the 
intervention points to the potential of teaching general DST concepts through 
body movement experiences in high school students for achieving the goals of an 
embodied and unificatory transdisciplinary education.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2022.102974
PMID: 35809420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. ISA Trans. 2025 Jun;161:48-65. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.03.012. Epub 2025 Mar 
15.

Fault reconstruction approach for saturated dynamic systems using adaptive 
estimation and optimization.

Gao ZW(1), Huang Q(2), Liu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Digitalization and Intelligent Diagnosis to New Energies, 
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Northeast Petroleum 
University, Daqing, China. Electronic address: gaozhiwei@nepu.edu.cn.
(2)Research Centre for Digitalization and Intelligent Diagnosis to New Energies, 
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Northeast Petroleum 
University, Daqing, China. Electronic address: huang_kai_qiang@163.com.
(3)Research Centre for Digitalization and Intelligent Diagnosis to New Energies, 
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Northeast Petroleum 
University, Daqing, China. Electronic address: liuyuanhong@nepu.edu.cn.

Modern industrial systems are becoming more complex and expensive, which have 
higher requirements on safety and reliability, and less tolerance on system 
performance degradation due to anomalies and faults. As a result, there is a 
strong motivation to address real-time monitoring and diagnosis techniques to 
detect a fault at an early stage and assess the severity of the faulty 
component. In this paper, real-time input and output data are used to monitor 
real-time and reconstruct faults for saturated dynamic systems using adaptive 
estimation and optimization techniques. Specifically, the saturation signals are 
partitioned into the conventional inputs without saturation and the 
beyond-saturation input signals. An unknown input decoupling approach is used to 
decouple unknown input uncertainty partially, and adaptive techniques are 
addressed to simultaneously reconstruct the additive faults and the 
beyond-saturation input signals. The estimator gains are obtained via the 
optimization for solving strict linear matrix inequalities to attenuate the 
effect from un-decoupled uncertainty to the estimation error dynamics. It is 
worth highlighting that the saturated input signals can also be reconstructed, 
which is particularly important when the saturated inputs cannot be measured 
directly, or it is costly to install extra sensors for the measurement. The 
proposed approach is to design offline, but implement using real-time input and 
output data, implying excellent real-time performance. The effectiveness of the 
proposed algorithm is demonstrated by an aircraft system and a single-link 
flexible joint robotic system.

Copyright © 2025 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.03.012
PMID: 40133179

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


93. J Couns Psychol. 2017 Nov;64(6):616-625. doi: 10.1037/cou0000238.

A multivariate dynamic systems model for psychotherapy with more than one 
client.

Butner JE(1), Deits-Lebehn C(1), Crenshaw AO(1), Wiltshire TJ(1), Perry NS(1), 
Kent de Grey RG(1), Hogan JN(1), Smith TW(1), Baucom KJW(1), Baucom BRW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Utah.

The dynamics of the give and take between therapist and client(s) is frequently 
of interest to therapy process researchers. Characterizing the ways that 
therapists respond to clients and clients respond to therapists can be 
challenging in therapeutic encounters involving a single therapist and a single 
client. The complexity of this challenge increases as the number of people 
involved in a therapeutic encounter increases not only because there are more 
people responding to one another but also because the patterns of responding can 
become more complex. This manuscript demonstrates how dyadic cross-lagged panel 
models can be extended to psychotherapeutic encounters involving 3 people and 
used to test processes that exist between dyadic subsets of the larger group as 
well as the group as one cohesive unit. Three hundred seventy-nine talk turns of 
fundamental frequency from a couple therapy session were modeled using 3 dyadic 
cross-lagged panel models, and each individual's respiratory sinus arrhythmia 
(RSA) was treated as a moderator. Although the regression coefficients for each 
dyadic subset (e.g., therapist-husband) were nonsignificant, an 
eigenvalue/eigenvector decomposition of the regression coefficients from the 3 
dyadic cross-lagged panel models suggests that interdependence exists at the 
level of the whole group (i.e., therapist-husband-wife) rather than between 
pairs of individuals within the group (e.g., husband-wife). Further, an 
interaction involving husband's RSA suggested that interdependence involving the 
husband ceased when the husband displayed greater regulatory effort. This 
combination of statistical methods allows for clearly distinguishing between 
dyadic therapeutic processes and group-level therapeutic processes. (PsycINFO 
Database Record

(c) 2017 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/cou0000238
PMID: 29154574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Child Dev. 2001 Nov-Dec;72(6):1887-903. doi: 10.1111/1467-8624.00384.

Child development and public policy: toward a dynamic systems perspective.

Yoshikawa H(1), Hsueh J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York 10003, USA. 
hiro@xp.psych.nyu.edu

Little theoretical work exists that proposes general mechanisms for how public 
policies may influence child development. This article argues that dynamic 
systems theories may be useful in illuminating such processes, as well as 
highlighting gaps in current research at the intersection of public policy 
analysis and developmental science. A brief review of dynamic systems theories 
as they are currently utilized in other areas of developmental science is 
provided, as well as a statement of why they may help advance research in public 
policy and child development. Five principles of dynamic systems theories are 
presented and discussed using examples from research that address the question, 
"How do current antipoverty and welfare reform policies affect children?" Also 
presented are examples of hypotheses and research questions that each principle 
may generate for future work. The concluding section presents challenges that 
each principle poses for research methodology, and potential uses of the dynamic 
systems approach for developing and integrating policy and program initiatives.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-8624.00384
PMID: 11768151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Sci Rep. 2024 Aug 7;14(1):18301. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67074-x.

Efficient three layer secured adaptive video steganography method using chaotic 
dynamic systems.

Kumar D(1), Sudha VK(2), Manikandan N(3), Ramaswamy K(4).

Author information:
(1)P.A. College of Engineering and Technology, Pollachi, India.
(2)Dr. Mahalingam College of Engineering and Technology, Pollachi, India.
(3)P.A. College of Engineering and Technology, Pollachi, 642002, India.
(4)Department of Mechanical Engineering, College of Engineering Science, Dambi 
Dollo University, Dembi Dolo, Ethiopia. dr.krishnarajdirectorcei@dadu.edu.et.

In light of the unprecedented growth in internet usage, safeguarding data from 
unauthorized access has emerged as a paramount concern. Cryptography and 
steganography stand as pivotal methods for ensuring data security during 
transmission. This study introduces an innovative adaptive video steganography 
approach featuring three tiers of security for extracting concealed information, 
thereby facilitating secure communication. The embedding process operates within 
the spatial domain of cover video frames, enabling a remarkable hiding ratio of 
up to 28.125% (equivalent to 2.25 bits per pixel in payload) without 
compromising the quality of video frames. Users are afforded the flexibility to 
select between partial or full embedding capacity of CVF through the proposed 
adaptive control block (ACB). The chaotic key generator (CKG), which combines a 
logistic map and sine map, is employed to generate highly sensitive initial 
seeds for permutation order (PO), frame selection (FS), and random position for 
hiding (RPH), thereby ensuring three levels of security. Prior to transmission, 
both CVF and hidden data (SD) are encrypted using PO. Encrypted CVFs are then 
randomly selected using FS for embedding, with RPH employed during the embedding 
process. Subsequently, for transmitting the stego-video frame, embedded CVFs are 
decrypted using the same PO. Experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of 
the proposed approach, achieving an adaptive hiding ratio ranging from 7.1 to 
28.125% (equivalent to 0.56 to 2.25 bits per pixel in payload) and maintaining a 
peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) within the range of 50.25 to 62.05 dB.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-67074-x
PMCID: PMC11306235
PMID: 39112647

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


96. ISA Trans. 2022 Jan;120:78-88. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2021.03.007. Epub 2021 Mar 
13.

Static gain estimation for nonlinear dynamic systems from steady-state values 
hidden in historical data.

Wang J(1), Wei M(2), Xing X(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Shandong University of 
Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: 
jiandong@sdust.edu.cn.
(2)College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Shandong University of 
Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: 
mywei9701@163.com.
(3)College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Shandong University of 
Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: 
xingxiaotongi@163.com.

Static gains are often required for control, diagnosis and optimization of 
nonlinear dynamic systems. This paper proposes a new approach to estimate static 
gains for nonlinear dynamic systems from steady-state values hidden in 
historical data. First, steady-state values of system inputs and outputs are 
extracted by automatically finding data segments in steady-state conditions. 
Second, static gains of nonlinear dynamic systems in different operating 
conditions are estimated via linear regression from these steady-state values. 
The proposed approach has two practical features: (i) estimated static gains can 
be verified in a convincing way, because the validness of extracted steady-state 
values is confirmed by visualizing data segments in steady-state conditions, and 
the accuracy of estimated static gains is verified by comparing the extracted 
steady-state values and their estimates; (ii) the proposed approach is simple to 
understand and implement in practice, since it only involves a linear equation 
between steady-state values and static gains, as well as a basic technique of 
linear regression. Numerical simulation and industrial application demonstrate 
the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Copyright © 2021 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2021.03.007
PMID: 33745693

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


97. Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci. 2013 Apr;17(2):233-67.

The emergence of learning-teaching trajectories in education: a complex dynamic 
systems approach.

Steenbeek H(1), van Geert P.

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, The Netherlands. h.w.steenbeek@rug.nl

In this article we shall focus on learning-teaching trajectories ='successful' 
as well as 'unsuccessful' ones - as emergent and dynamic phenomena resulting 
from the interactions in the entire educational context, in particular the 
interaction between students and teachers viewed as processes of intertwining 
self-, other- and co-regulation. The article provides a review of the 
educational research literature on action regulation in learning and teaching, 
and interprets this literature in light of the theory of complex dynamic 
systems. Based on this reinterpretation of the literature, two dynamic models 
are proposed, one focusing on the short-term dynamics of learning-teaching 
interactions as they take place in classrooms, the other focusing on the 
long-term dynamics of interactions in a network of variables encompassing 
concerns, evaluations, actions and action effects (such as learning) students 
and teachers. The aim of presenting these models is to demonstrate, first, the 
possibility of transforming existing educational theory into dynamic models and, 
second, to provide some suggestions as to how such models can be used to further 
educational theory and practice.

PMID: 23517608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Anal Psychol. 2019 Nov;64(5):738-760. doi: 10.1111/1468-5922.12544.

A dynamic systems approach to the feeling toned complex.

Krieger NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Zurich.

A review of Jung's writing on the 'feeling-toned complex' shows that he 
considered it to comprise independent, split-off, psychic elements. Modern 
advances in scientific thinking and technology, namely Dynamic Systems Theory 
and neuro-imaging, allow us to better define and explore this psychic 
phenomenon. Considering the constellation of the complex as a hierarchy of 
dynamic systems allows for a prediction of the timing of brain activity. This 
has been confirmed by two independent studies using fMRI and QEEG while 
administering the Word Association Experiment, the tool Jung used to investigate 
brain/psychic functioning over a century ago. Using as a framework the stages of 
the constellation of a complex viewed as a hierarchy of dynamic systems, I 
review the neuro-imaging studies reported by Petchkovsky et al. (2013, 2017) and 
Escamilla et al. (2018), concluding that quantitative theoretical predictions 
and experimental results are in agreement within an order of magnitude. The 
change in attention caused by the constellation of the complex can also be 
conceived as the switching from a default neuro-network, a startle response 
activating executive functioning in the frontal cortex of either the ego-complex 
or an autonomous complex.

Publisher: L’examen des écrits de Jung sur le ‘complexe affectivement chargé’ 
montre qu’il considérait ces complexes comme des éléments psychiques 
indépendants, clivés. Des innovations modernes de la pensée scientifique et de 
la technologie, la Théorie des Systèmes Dynamiques et la neuro-imagerie, nous 
permettent de mieux définir et d’étudier ce phénomène psychique. Penser la 
constellation du complexe en tant que hiérarchie de systèmes dynamiques permet 
de faire des prévisions sur le « timing » de l’activité du cerveau. Ceci a été 
confirmé par deux études indépendantes utilisant l’IRMf et l’EEGQ durant la 
passation du Test d’Association de Mots, l’outil que Jung a utilisé il y a plus 
d’un siècle pour explorer le fonctionnement psychique/du cerveau. Utilisant 
comme cadre de travail la constellation du complexe considérée comme une 
hiérarchie de systèmes dynamiques, j’examine les études sur la neuro-imagerie 
rapportées par Petchkovsky et al. (2013, 2017) et Escamilla et al. (2018). Ces 
études apportent la conclusion que les prédictions théoriques quantitatives et 
les résultats expérimentaux sont en accord et dans le même ordre de grandeur. Le 
changement dans l’attention produit par la constellation d’un complexe peut 
également être compris comme un basculement: l’abandon du système neuronal 
standard et la réaction de sursaut qui active le fonctionnement exécutif dans le 
cortex frontal soit du complexe du moi soit d’un complexe autonome.

Publisher: Eine Rückschau auf Jungs Schrift über den 'gefühlsbetonten Komplex' 
zeigt, daß er ihn als unabhängiges, abgespaltenes psychisches Elemente ansah. 
Die modernen Fortschritte in wissenschaftlichem Denken und in Technologie, 
namentlich in der Theorie dynamischer Systeme und in der Neurobildgebung, 
ermöglichen es uns, dieses psychische Phänomen besser zu definieren und zu 
untersuchen. Die Betrachtung der Konstellierung des Komplexes als Hierarchie 
dynamischer Systeme ermöglicht eine Vorhersage des Zeitpunktes der 
Gehirnaktivität. Dies wurde durch zwei unabhängige Studien unter Verwendung von 
fMRT und QEEG bei der Durchführung des Wortassoziationsexperimentes bestätigt, 
dem Tool, mit dem Jung vor über einem Jahrhundert die Funktion des Gehirns und 
der Psyche untersuchte. Unter Nutzung der Stadien der Konstellierung eines 
Komplexes, welche als Hierarchie dynamischer Systeme gesehen werden, als Rahmen, 
betrachte ich die von Petchkovsky et al. (2013, 2017) und Escamilla et al. 
(2018) vorgelegten Studien zur Neurobildgebung die zu dem Schluß kommen, daß 
quantitative theoretische Vorhersagen und experimentelle Ergebnisse in 
signifikantem Maße übereinstimmen. Die Veränderung der Aufmerksamkeitsspannung, 
die durch die Konstellierung des Komplexes verursacht wird, kann auch verstanden 
werden als Umschalten eines Standardneuronetzwerkes, als eine schreckhafte 
Reaktion, die impulsgebende Funktionen im Frontalkortex aktiviert, entweder 
solche des Ego-Komplexes oder eines autonomen Komplexes.

Publisher: Un’analisi degli scritti di Jung sui ‘complessi a tonalità affettiva’ 
mostra che egli li considerava elementi psichici indipendenti e autonomi. I 
progressi moderni nell’esplorazione scientifica e nella tecnologia, in 
particolare la Teoria dei Sistemi Dinamici e la risonanza magnetica funzionale, 
ci permettono di definire ed esplorare meglio questo fenomeno psichico. 
Considerare la costellazione del complesso come una gerarchia di sistemi 
dinamici consente di prevedere i tempi dell’attivazione cerebrale. Questo è 
stato confermato da due studi indipendenti che hanno utilizzato RMIf e EEGQ 
durante l’esperimento di Associazione Verbale, lo strumento utilizzato da Jung 
per investigare il funzionamento cerebrale/psichico oltre un secolo fa. 
Utilizzando gli stadi della gerarchia della costellazione di un complesso di 
sistemi dinamici al lavoro, analizzo gli studi di diagnostica per immagini 
riportarti da Petchkovskt et al. (2013,2017) e Escamilla et al. (2018), 
concludendo che le previsioni teoriche quantitative ed i risultati sperimentali 
concordano significativamente. Il cambiamento di attenzione causato dalla 
costellazione del complesso può anche essere concepito come una variazione da un 
default di un network neuronale, una reazione allarmante che attiva il 
funzionamento esecutivo nella corteccia frontale o del complesso dell’Io o di un 
complesso autonomo.

Publisher: Обзор работ Юнга по «чувственно окрашенным комплексам» показывает, 
что он понимал комплексы как независимые, отщепленные психические элементы. 
Современное научное мышление и технология, а именно теория динамических систем и 
нейро-образов, позволяет нам лучше определить данный психический феномен, а 
также исследовать его. Рассмотрение констелляции комплекса как иерархии 
динамических систем позволяет предсказать временные рамки мозговой активности. 
Это нашло подтверждение в двух независимых исследованиях с использованием фМРТ и 
количественной ЭЭГ во время проведения словесного ассоциативного эксперимента, 
методики, которую Юнг использовал более века назад для изучения 
мозгового/психического функционирования. Рассматривая стадии констелляции 
комплекса как иерархию динамических систем, я провожу обзор нейро-образов, 
изученных в исследованиях Petchkovsky et al. (2013, 2017) and Escamilla et al. 
(2018). В качестве вывода предполагается, что количественные теоретические 
предсказания и экспериментально полученные результаты - это величины одного 
порядка. Изменение внимания, вызванное констелляцией комплекса, так же может 
быть понято как переключение с дефолт системы мозга (сети пассивного режима 
работы мозга), как старт-рефлекс, активирующий исполнительную функцию во 
фронтальной коре либо при констелляции эго-комплекса, либо автономного 
комплекса.

Publisher: Una revisión de los escritos de Jung sobre los ‘complejos de 
tonalidad afectiva’ muestra que el consideraba a los mismos como elementos 
psíquicos independientes y disociados. Los avances modernos en el pensamientos 
científico y en la tecnología, específicamente la Teoría de los Sistemas 
Dinámicos y la neuro-imagen, nos permite explorar y definir este fenómeno 
psíquico de mejor manera. Considerar la constelación de un complejo como una 
jerarquía de sistemas dinámicos posibilita la predicción del ritmo de la 
actividad cerebral. Esto ha sido confirmado por dos estudios independientes 
utilizando fMRI y QEEG durante la administración del Experimento de Asociación 
de Palabras, la herramienta utilizada por Jung para investigar el funcionamiento 
cerebral/psíquico un siglo atrás. Utilizando como marco de referencia, las 
etapas de la constelación de un complejo visto como una jerarquía de sistemas 
dinámicos, presento una revisión de estudios de neuro-imágenes reportados por 
Petchkovsky et al. (2013,2017) y Escamilla et al. (2018), concluyendo que las 
predicciones teórico cuantitativas y experimentales están en concordancia dentro 
de un orden de magnitud. El cambio de atención causado por la constelación de un 
complejo puede también ser concebido como un cambio desde el default 
neuro-network, una respuesta de sobresalto que activa el funcionamiento 
ejecutivo en la corteza frontal tanto del complejo del ego, como de un complejo 
autónomo.

Publisher: 对荣格关于“情感基调的情结”的综述显示, 他把它们视为独立的、分离的心理成分。现代先进的科学思想和技术, 即动力系统理论及神经成像技术, 
可以允许我们更好地探索和定义这个心理现象。假如把情结的聚集视为一个动力系统的层级结构, 我们就可以基于此预测脑活动的时机。已有两个独立的研究证实了这一点, 
这两个研究分别在词语联想 (即荣格在一个世纪以前用于研究脑/心理功能的工具)进行的同时使用了fMRI和QEEG。我把情结看作是动力系统的层级结构, 
以其不同阶段作为架构, 来综述Petchkovsky等(2013, 2017) 和Escamilla 等 (2018)所报告的神经成像研究, 并得出结论, 
定量的理论预测和实证结果在量级上可以取得一致的结果。情结聚集所带来的注意的改变还可以是默认的神经网络的开关, 即一个由惊吓反应触动的, 处于额叶的执行功能, 
这一功能可能是关于自我情结的或是自主情结的。.

© 2019, The Society of Analytical Psychology.

DOI: 10.1111/1468-5922.12544
PMID: 31659761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cogn Dev. 2012 Oct-Dec;27(4):401-418. doi: 10.1016/j.cogdev.2012.07.006.

Contributions of Dynamic Systems Theory to Cognitive Development.

Spencer JP(1), Austin A(1), Schutte AR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Delta Center, University of Iowa.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

This paper examines the contributions of dynamic systems theory to the field of 
cognitive development, focusing on modeling using dynamic neural fields. A brief 
overview highlights the contributions of dynamic systems theory and the central 
concepts of dynamic field theory (DFT). We then probe empirical predictions and 
findings generated by DFT around two examples-the DFT of infant perseverative 
reaching that explains the Piagetian A-not-B error, and the DFT of spatial 
memory that explain changes in spatial cognition in early development. A 
systematic review of the literature around these examples reveals that 
computational modeling is having an impact on empirical research in cognitive 
development; however, this impact does not extend to neural and clinical 
research. Moreover, there is a tendency for researchers to interpret models 
narrowly, anchoring them to specific tasks. We conclude on an optimistic note, 
encouraging both theoreticians and experimentalists to work toward a more 
theory-driven future.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cogdev.2012.07.006
PMCID: PMC4454421
PMID: 26052181


100. Discret Event Dyn Syst. 2019;29(3):367-392. doi: 10.1007/s10626-019-00287-9. 
Epub 2019 Aug 22.

Flexible Nets: a modeling formalism for dynamic systems with uncertain 
parameters.

Júlvez J(1)(2)(3), Oliver SG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)2Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)3Department of Computer Science and Systems Engineering, University of 
Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

The modeling of dynamic systems is frequently hampered by a limited knowledge of 
the system to be modeled and by the difficulty of acquiring accurate data. This 
often results in a number of uncertain system parameters that are hard to 
incorporate into a mathematical model. Thus, there is a need for modeling 
formalisms that can accommodate all available data, even if uncertain, in order 
to employ them and build useful models. This paper shows how the Flexible Nets 
(FNs) formalism can be exploited to handle uncertain parameters while offering 
attractive analysis possibilities. FNs are composed of two nets, an event net 
and an intensity net, that model the relation between the state and the 
processes of the system. While the event net captures how the state of the 
system is updated by the processes in the system, the intensity net models how 
the speed of such processes is determined by the state of the system. Uncertain 
parameters are accounted for by sets of inequalities associated with both the 
event net and the intensity net. FNs are not only demonstrated to be a valuable 
formalism to cope with system uncertainties, but also to be capable of modeling 
different system features, such as resource allocation and control actions, in a 
facile manner.

© The Author(s) 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s10626-019-00287-9
PMCID: PMC7067250
PMID: 32214675


101. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2013 Feb;24(2):310-21. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2012.2231436.

Identification and prediction of dynamic systems using an interactively 
recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural network.

Lin YY, Chang JY, Lin CT.

This paper presents a novel recurrent fuzzy neural network, called an 
interactively recurrent self-evolving fuzzy neural network (IRSFNN), for 
prediction and identification of dynamic systems. The recurrent structure in an 
IRSFNN is formed as an external loops and internal feedback by feeding the rule 
firing strength of each rule to others rules and itself. The consequent part in 
the IRSFNN is composed of a Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) or functional-link-based 
type. The proposed IRSFNN employs a functional link neural network (FLNN) to the 
consequent part of fuzzy rules for promoting the mapping ability. Unlike a 
TSK-type fuzzy neural network, the FLNN in the consequent part is a nonlinear 
function of input variables. An IRSFNNs learning starts with an empty rule base 
and all of the rules are generated and learned online through a simultaneous 
structure and parameter learning. An on-line clustering algorithm is effective 
in generating fuzzy rules. The consequent update parameters are derived by a 
variable-dimensional Kalman filter algorithm. The premise and recurrent 
parameters are learned through a gradient descent algorithm. We test the IRSFNN 
for the prediction and identification of dynamic plants and compare it to other 
well-known recurrent FNNs. The proposed model obtains enhanced performance 
results.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2012.2231436
PMID: 24808284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Top Curr Chem. 2014;354:35-70. doi: 10.1007/128_2013_514.

Transition-metal-complexed catenanes and rotaxanes: from dynamic systems to 
functional molecular machines.

Durot S(1), Heitz V, Sour A, Sauvage JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Chimie de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg, 4, rue Blaise 
Pascal, Strasbourg, 67070, France.

Transition metal-based catenanes and rotaxanes constitute a specific class of 
mechanically interlocked molecules whose metal centers are essential both as 
templates in the construction of the compounds and for their ability to induce 
large-amplitude motions. In the present chapter we will first present a 
historical perspective of the field of interlocking compounds in general, in 
relation to molecular machines, starting with old work dating back to the 1980s 
and 1990s. Copper was shown many years ago to be the metal of choice for 
synthesizing the compounds via a template approach and for setting the molecules 
in motion using a redox signal (Cu(II)/Cu(I)). In a second paragraph, we will 
discuss various rotaxanes able to undergo a pirouetting motion of the axis 
within the threaded ring. Two families of such molecules will be mentioned: (1) 
a porphyrin-containing [2]rotaxane whose pirouetting motion is induced by a 
chemical reaction and (2) electrochemically driven systems. In this second 
category of [2]rotaxanes, the rate of motion could be dramatically increased by 
gradually modifying structural parameters and, in particular, by making the 
metal center less and less hindered by its surrounding ligands. The third 
section will be devoted to molecular shuttles and muscles, both families of 
compounds being reminiscent of linear machines such as biological muscles. By 
replacing the classical 2,9-diaryl-1,10-phenanthroline chelate (highly shielding 
and hindering) used by our group since the 1980s by an endocyclic but 
non-sterically hindering 3,3'-biisoquinoline derivative, the shuttling rate was 
increased in spectacular fashion, demonstrating the importance of steric factors 
in transition metal-based molecular machines. The same 3,3'-biisoquinoline motif 
was also used in the elaboration of a three-station shuttle, leading to 
long-distance (>20 Å) transport of a ring along the axis on which it is 
threaded. Finally, porphyrin-containing [3]rotaxanes and [4]rotaxanes, the 
latter displaying an overall cyclic structure, will be discussed and shown to 
behave as adjustable and switchable receptors. The synthesis of such compounds 
is a particularly challenging task in itself. In addition, the new receptors 
display fascinating properties such as, in particular, their ability to compress 
various guests and to expel them from their binding site using a chemical 
signal.

DOI: 10.1007/128_2013_514
PMID: 24563013


103. J R Soc Interface. 2017 Jul;14(132):20170126. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0126.

Monte Carlo profile confidence intervals for dynamic systems.

Ionides EL(1), Breto C(2), Park J(2), Smith RA(3), King AA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 
ionides@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Statistics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, The University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Mathematics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Monte Carlo methods to evaluate and maximize the likelihood function enable the 
construction of confidence intervals and hypothesis tests, facilitating 
scientific investigation using models for which the likelihood function is 
intractable. When Monte Carlo error can be made small, by sufficiently 
exhaustive computation, then the standard theory and practice of 
likelihood-based inference applies. As datasets become larger, and models more 
complex, situations arise where no reasonable amount of computation can render 
Monte Carlo error negligible. We develop profile likelihood methodology to 
provide frequentist inferences that take into account Monte Carlo uncertainty. 
We investigate the role of this methodology in facilitating inference for 
computationally challenging dynamic latent variable models. We present examples 
arising in the study of infectious disease transmission, demonstrating our 
methodology for inference on nonlinear dynamic models using genetic sequence 
data and panel time-series data. We also discuss applicability to nonlinear 
time-series and spatio-temporal data.

© 2017 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0126
PMCID: PMC5550967
PMID: 28679663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.


104. Front Hum Neurosci. 2021 Apr 9;15:613789. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.613789. 
eCollection 2021.

A Dynamic Systems Framework for Gender/Sex Development: From Sensory Input in 
Infancy to Subjective Certainty in Toddlerhood.

Fausto-Sterling A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, United States.

From birth to 15 months infants and caregivers form a fundamentally 
intersubjective, dyadic unit within which the infant's ability to recognize 
gender/sex in the world develops. Between about 18 and 36 months the infant 
accumulates an increasingly clear and subjective sense of self as female or 
male. We know little about how the precursors to gender/sex identity form during 
the intersubjective period, nor how they transform into an independent sense of 
self by 3 years of age. In this Theory and Hypothesis article I offer a general 
framework for thinking about this problem. I propose that through repetition and 
patterning, the dyadic interactions in which infants and caregivers engage imbue 
the infant with an embodied, i.e., sensori-motor understanding of gender/sex. 
During this developmental period (which I label Phase 1) gender/sex is primarily 
an intersubjective project. From 15 to 18 months (which I label Phase 2) there 
are few reports of newly appearing gender/sex behavioral differences, and I 
hypothesize that this absence reflects a period of developmental instability 
during which there is a transition from gender/sex as primarily inter-subjective 
to gender/sex as primarily subjective. Beginning at 18 months (i.e., the start 
of Phase 3), a toddler's subjective sense of self as having a gender/sex 
emerges, and it solidifies by 3 years of age. I propose a dynamic systems 
perspective to track how infants first assimilate gender/sex information during 
the intersubjective period (birth to 15 months); then explore what changes might 
occur during a hypothesized phase transition (15 to 18 months), and finally, 
review the emergence and initial stabilization of individual subjectivity-the 
period from 18 to 36 months. The critical questions explored focus on how to 
model and translate data from very different experimental disciplines, 
especially neuroscience, physiology, developmental psychology and cognitive 
development. I close by proposing the formation of a research consortium on 
gender/sex development during the first 3 years after birth.

Copyright © 2021 Fausto-Sterling.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.613789
PMCID: PMC8062721
PMID: 33897391

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


105. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2016 Feb;27(2):249-61. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2440473. Epub 2015 Jun 16.

Optimization in Quaternion Dynamic Systems: Gradient, Hessian, and Learning 
Algorithms.

Xu D, Xia Y, Mandic DP.

The optimization of real scalar functions of quaternion variables, such as the 
mean square error or array output power, underpins many practical applications. 
Solutions typically require the calculation of the gradient and Hessian. 
However, real functions of quaternion variables are essentially nonanalytic, 
which are prohibitive to the development of quaternion-valued learning systems. 
To address this issue, we propose new definitions of quaternion gradient and 
Hessian, based on the novel generalized Hamilton-real (GHR) calculus, thus 
making a possible efficient derivation of general optimization algorithms 
directly in the quaternion field, rather than using the isomorphism with the 
real domain, as is current practice. In addition, unlike the existing quaternion 
gradients, the GHR calculus allows for the product and chain rule, and for a 
one-to-one correspondence of the novel quaternion gradient and Hessian with 
their real counterparts. Properties of the quaternion gradient and Hessian 
relevant to numerical applications are also introduced, opening a new avenue of 
research in quaternion optimization and greatly simplified the derivations of 
learning algorithms. The proposed GHR calculus is shown to yield the same 
generic algorithm forms as the corresponding real- and complex-valued 
algorithms. Advantages of the proposed framework are illuminated over 
illustrative simulations in quaternion signal processing and neural networks.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2440473
PMID: 26087504


106. Front Psychol. 2015 Jul 1;6:914. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00914. eCollection 
2015.

Editorial: Dynamic systems theory and embodiment in psychotherapy research. A 
new look at process and outcome.

Salvatore S(1), Tschacher W(2), Gelo OC(3), Koch SC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of History, Society and Human Studies, University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy.
(2)University Hospital of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bern Bern, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of History, Society and Human Studies, University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy ; Department of Psychotherapy Science, Sigmund Freud University 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Therapy Sciences, SRH University Heidelberg Heidelberg, 
Germany.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00914
PMCID: PMC4486829
PMID: 26191023


107. Child Dev. 2022 Sep;93(5):e501-e514. doi: 10.1111/cdev.13808. Epub 2022 May 30.

A dynamic systems account of parental self-regulation processes in the context 
of challenging child behavior.

Zhang X(1), Gatzke-Kopp LM(1), Cole PM(2), Ram N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Departments of Communication and Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.

To advance the understanding of how parental self-regulation contributes to 
their role in supporting children's development, this study proposes a model of 
the dynamic processes involved in parental self-regulation. Based on time-series 
data from 157 mothers and their 30- to 60-month-old children (49.7% female; 96% 
White; data collected June 2017-December 2019 in central Pennsylvania, U.S.) 
during a challenging wait task, the model was tested by examining the temporal 
relations among challenging child behavior, maternal physiology, and maternal 
responsiveness. Results were consistent with the hypothesized dynamic negative 
feedback processes and revealed their associations with the overall quality of 
parenting behaviors and experiences. Findings elucidate how parents adapt to 
competing external (attending to child) and internal (restoring parents' 
equilibrium) demands during parenting challenges.

© 2022 The Authors. Child Development © 2022 Society for Research in Child 
Development.

DOI: 10.1111/cdev.13808
PMID: 35635069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Bioinformatics. 2021 Jun 9;37(9):1330-1331. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa786.

SEEDS: data driven inference of structural model errors and unknown inputs for 
dynamic systems biology.

Newmiwaka T(1), Engelhardt B(1)(2)(3), Wendland P(1), Kahl D(1), Fröhlich H(2), 
Kschischo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Technology, University of Applied Sciences 
Koblenz, RheinAhrCampus, Remagen 53424, Germany.
(2)Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT (b-it), Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn 53115, Germany.
(3)AbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, 
Knollstrasse, Ludwigshafen 67061, Germany.

SUMMARY: Dynamic models formulated as ordinary differential equations can 
provide information about the mechanistic and causal interactions in biological 
systems to guide targeted interventions and to design further experiments. 
Inaccurate knowledge about the structure, functional form and parameters of 
interactions is a major obstacle to mechanistic modeling. A further challenge is 
the open nature of biological systems which receive unknown inputs from their 
environment. The R-package SEEDS implements two recently developed algorithms to 
infer structural model errors and unknown inputs from output measurements. This 
information can facilitate efficient model recalibration as well as experimental 
design in the case of misfits between the initial model and data.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: For the R-package seeds, see the CRAN server 
https://cran.r-project.org/package=seeds.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa786
PMID: 32931565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cogn Sci. 2017 Feb;41 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):52-72. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12369. Epub 2016 
Apr 29.

Moving Word Learning to a Novel Space: A Dynamic Systems View of Referent 
Selection and Retention.

Samuelson LK(1)(2), Kucker SC(3)(2), Spencer JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia.
(2)DeLTA Center.
(3)The Callier Center for Communication Disorders, School of Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas.

Theories of cognitive development must address both the issue of how children 
bring their knowledge to bear on behavior in-the-moment, and how knowledge 
changes over time. We argue that seeking answers to these questions requires an 
appreciation of the dynamic nature of the developing system in its full, 
reciprocal complexity. We illustrate this dynamic complexity with results from 
two lines of research on early word learning. The first demonstrates how the 
child's active engagement with objects and people supports referent selection 
via memories for what objects were previously seen in a cued location. The 
second set of results highlights changes in the role of novelty and attentional 
processes in referent selection and retention as children's knowledge of words 
and objects grows. Together this work suggests that understanding systems for 
perception, action, attention, and memory, and their complex interaction, is 
critical to understand word learning. We review recent literature that 
highlights the complex interactions between these processes in cognitive 
development and point to critical issues for future work.

Copyright © 2016 Cognitive Science Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/cogs.12369
PMCID: PMC5086318
PMID: 27127009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Behav Ther. 2025 Jan;56(1):199-212. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2024.10.006. Epub 2024 
Nov 5.

A Network Control Theory of Dynamic Systems Approach to Personalize Therapy.

Hofmann SG(1).

Author information:
(1)Philipps-University Marburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
stefan.g.hofmann@gmail.com.

Contemporary latent disease models of psychopathology have shown limited 
clinical utility and the efficacy of conventional treatments have been 
disappointing. An alternative approach offers the network approach and a dynamic 
systems perspective to psychopathology and treatment change. To understand and 
modify dynamic systems, engineering and mathematics have been relying on 
principles of network control theory. This article will discuss the application 
of network control theory of dynamic systems approach to personalize therapy. 
Network control theory can be used as a guide for personalizing treatment by 
choosing the most promising intervention strategy targeting the change processes 
based on the network structure. A composit case illustration will demonstrate 
the principles and application of network control theory to therapy in practice 
within the framework of process-based therapy. In conclusion, a network control 
theory of dynamic systems approach is highly relevant and applicable to clinical 
science.

Copyright © 2024 Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies. Published 
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beth.2024.10.006
PMID: 39814513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Hofmann receives financial support by the 
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (as part of the Alexander von Humboldt 
Professur), the Hessische Ministerium fu¨r Wissenschaft und Kunst (as part of 
the LOEWE Spitzenprofessur), and the DYNAMIC center, funded by the LOEWE program 
of the Hessian Ministry of Science and Arts (Grant Number: 
LOEWE1/16/519/03/09.001 (0009)/98). He also receives compensation for his work 
as editor from SpringerNature and royalties and payments for his work from 
various publishers.


111. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Oct 28;12(10):e1005153. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005153. eCollection 2016 Oct.

Structural Identifiability of Dynamic Systems Biology Models.

Villaverde AF(1)(2), Barreiro A(2), Papachristodoulou A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Systems & Control Engineering, University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.

A powerful way of gaining insight into biological systems is by creating a 
nonlinear differential equation model, which usually contains many unknown 
parameters. Such a model is called structurally identifiable if it is possible 
to determine the values of its parameters from measurements of the model 
outputs. Structural identifiability is a prerequisite for parameter estimation, 
and should be assessed before exploiting a model. However, this analysis is 
seldom performed due to the high computational cost involved in the necessary 
symbolic calculations, which quickly becomes prohibitive as the problem size 
increases. In this paper we show how to analyse the structural identifiability 
of a very general class of nonlinear models by extending methods originally 
developed for studying observability. We present results about models whose 
identifiability had not been previously determined, report unidentifiabilities 
that had not been found before, and show how to modify those unidentifiable 
models to make them identifiable. This method helps prevent problems caused by 
lack of identifiability analysis, which can compromise the success of tasks such 
as experiment design, parameter estimation, and model-based optimization. The 
procedure is called STRIKE-GOLDD (STRuctural Identifiability taKen as 
Extended-Generalized Observability with Lie Derivatives and Decomposition), and 
it is implemented in a MATLAB toolbox which is available as open source 
software. The broad applicability of this approach facilitates the analysis of 
the increasingly complex models used in systems biology and other areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005153
PMCID: PMC5085250
PMID: 27792726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


112. Front Physiol. 2013 Feb 5;4:15. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00015. eCollection 2013.

Dynamic systems approaches and levels of analysis in the nervous system.

Parker D(1), Srivastava V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge Cambridge, UK.

Various analyses are applied to physiological signals. While epistemological 
diversity is necessary to address effects at different levels, there is often a 
sense of competition between analyses rather than integration. This is evidenced 
by the differences in the criteria needed to claim understanding in different 
approaches. In the nervous system, neuronal analyses that attempt to explain 
network outputs in cellular and synaptic terms are rightly criticized as being 
insufficient to explain global effects, emergent or otherwise, while 
higher-level statistical and mathematical analyses can provide quantitative 
descriptions of outputs but can only hypothesize on their underlying mechanisms. 
The major gap in neuroscience is arguably our inability to translate what should 
be seen as complementary effects between levels. We thus ultimately need 
approaches that allow us to bridge between different spatial and temporal 
levels. Analytical approaches derived from critical phenomena in the physical 
sciences are increasingly being applied to physiological systems, including the 
nervous system, and claim to provide novel insight into physiological mechanisms 
and opportunities for their control. Analyses of criticality have suggested 
several important insights that should be considered in cellular analyses. 
However, there is a mismatch between lower-level neurophysiological approaches 
and statistical phenomenological analyses that assume that lower-level effects 
can be abstracted away, which means that these effects are unknown or 
inaccessible to experimentalists. As a result experimental designs often 
generate data that is insufficient for analyses of criticality. This review 
considers the relevance of insights from analyses of criticality to neuronal 
network analyses, and highlights that to move the analyses forward and close the 
gap between the theoretical and neurobiological levels, it is necessary to 
consider that effects at each level are complementary rather than in 
competition.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00015
PMCID: PMC3564044
PMID: 23386835


113. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2024 May;35(5):6166-6179. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3201511. Epub 2024 May 2.

Explainable Intelligent Fault Diagnosis for Nonlinear Dynamic Systems: From 
Unsupervised to Supervised Learning.

Chen H, Liu Z, Alippi C, Huang B, Liu D.

The increased complexity and intelligence of automation systems require the 
development of intelligent fault diagnosis (IFD) methodologies. By relying on 
the concept of a suspected space, this study develops explainable data-driven 
IFD approaches for nonlinear dynamic systems. More specifically, we parameterize 
nonlinear systems through a generalized kernel representation for system 
modeling and the associated fault diagnosis. An important result obtained is a 
unified form of kernel representations, applicable to both unsupervised and 
supervised learning. More importantly, through a rigorous theoretical analysis, 
we discover the existence of a bridge (i.e., a bijective mapping) between some 
supervised and unsupervised learning-based entities. Notably, the designed IFD 
approaches achieve the same performance with the use of this bridge. In order to 
have a better understanding of the results obtained, both unsupervised and 
supervised neural networks are chosen as the learning tools to identify the 
generalized kernel representations and design the IFD schemes; an invertible 
neural network is then employed to build the bridge between them. This article 
is a perspective article, whose contribution lies in proposing and formalizing 
the fundamental concepts for explainable intelligent learning methods, 
contributing to system modeling and data-driven IFD designs for nonlinear 
dynamic systems.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3201511
PMID: 36074885


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021 Apr 13;118(15):e2020397118. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2020397118.

Inference of dynamic systems from noisy and sparse data via manifold-constrained 
Gaussian processes.

Yang S(1), Wong SWK(2), Kou SC(3).

Author information:
(1)H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332.
(2)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, 
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada.
(3)Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 
kou@stat.harvard.edu.

Parameter estimation for nonlinear dynamic system models, represented by 
ordinary differential equations (ODEs), using noisy and sparse data, is a vital 
task in many fields. We propose a fast and accurate method, manifold-constrained 
Gaussian process inference (MAGI), for this task. MAGI uses a Gaussian process 
model over time series data, explicitly conditioned on the manifold constraint 
that derivatives of the Gaussian process must satisfy the ODE system. By doing 
so, we completely bypass the need for numerical integration and achieve 
substantial savings in computational time. MAGI is also suitable for inference 
with unobserved system components, which often occur in real experiments. MAGI 
is distinct from existing approaches as we provide a principled statistical 
construction under a Bayesian framework, which incorporates the ODE system 
through the manifold constraint. We demonstrate the accuracy and speed of MAGI 
using realistic examples based on physical experiments.

Copyright © 2021 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2020397118
PMCID: PMC8053978
PMID: 33837150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


115. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2020 Dec 22;94:e202012136.

[Uncertainty, dynamic systems, principles of quantum mechanics and their 
relationship to the health-disease process (analysis proposal).].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Arch-Tirado E(1), Collado-Corona MÁ(1), Lino-González AL(2), Terrazo-Lluch J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Neurológico del Centro Médico ABC. Sede Santa Fe. Ciudad de México. 
México.
(2)Subdirección de Investigación Clínica. División de Neurociencia. Área de 
Neurociencia Clínica. Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación "Luis Guillermo 
Ibarra Ibarra". Ciudad de México. México.

The purpose of this work is to discuss the importance and possible application 
of some foundations of quantum mechanics in the health-disease process, 
considering for this, that the laws and foundations of atomic theory are the 
same that govern displacement in space and time in human beings. Based on the 
impossibility of determining the displacement of subatomic particles in a given 
space and time, as a consequence of not having measuring instruments for said 
microscales, we propose feasible that the same happens with the uncertainty 
generated by the times and movements of human beings in really large spaces, 
reason why the analysis of the temporo-spatial location of a moving subject, in 
a certain time and space is impossible, fact that we consider, could represent 
the behavior in Pandemics. The foundations of quantum mechanics that have been 
considered for this purpose are dynamic systems, the Schrödinger cat paradox, 
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the law of gases, times and movements, and 
the Maxwell-Boltzmann entropy. On the other hand, it is proposed to consider the 
adaptation of measurement ecis ecisión statistical procedures (decisión tree and 
set theory) and finally the implementation of a unitary probabilistic cube is 
proposed, which allows locating a subject immersed in the health process disease 
through three axes developed considering the definition of health stipulated by 
the WHO.

Publisher: El presente trabajo tuvo como finalidad discutir la importancia y la 
posible aplicación de algunos fundamentos de la mecánica cuántica en el proceso 
de salud-enfermedad, considerando para esto que las leyes y fundamentos de la 
teoría atómica son los mismos que rigen los desplazamientos en el espacio y el 
tiempo en los seres humanos. Con base en la imposibilidad de determinar el 
desplazamiento de las partículas subatómicas en un espacio y tiempo determinado, 
como consecuencia de no contar con instrumentos de medición para dichas 
microescalas, consideramos factible que lo mismo suceda con la incertidumbre 
generada por los tiempos y movimientos de los seres humanos en espacios 
realmente grandes, por lo que el análisis de la ubicación temporo-espacial de un 
sujeto en movimiento, en un tiempo y en un espacio determinado, es imposible. 
Creemos que este hecho podría representar el comportamiento en las pandemias. 
Los fundamentos de la mecánica cuántica que se han considerado con dicho fin 
son: los sistemas dinámicos; la paradoja del gato de Schrödinger; el principio 
de incertidumbre de Heisenberg; la ley de gases, tiempos y movimientos; la 
entropía de Maxwell-Boltzmann. Por otra parte, se propone considerar la 
adaptación de herramientas de medición basadas en procedimientos estadísticos 
(árbol de decisiones y teoría de conjuntos) y, finalmente, se propone la 
implementación de un cubo probabilístico unitario, el cual permita ubicar a un 
sujeto inmerso en el proceso de salud-enfermedad mediante tres ejes 
desarrollados según la definición de salud estipulada por la Organización 
Mundial de la Salud.

PMCID: PMC11582894
PMID: 33350398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Los autores declaran que no existe ningún 
conflicto de interés.


116. Ann Biomed Eng. 2013 Apr;41(4):837-46. doi: 10.1007/s10439-012-0721-2. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Decoupling directed and passive motion in dynamic systems: particle tracking 
microrheology of sputum.

Fong EJ(1), Sharma Y, Fallica B, Tierney DB, Fortune SM, Zaman MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, 36 Cummington St, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Probing the physical properties of heterogeneous materials is essential to 
understand the structure, function and dynamics of complex fluids including 
cells, mucus, and polymer solutions. Particle tracking microrheology is a useful 
method to passively probe viscoelastic properties on micron length scales by 
tracking the thermal motion of beads embedded in the sample. However, errors 
associated with active motion have limited the implementation to dynamic 
systems. We present a simple method to decouple active and Brownian motion, 
enabling particle tracking to be applied to fluctuating heterogeneous systems. 
We use the movement perpendicular to the major axis of motion in time to 
calculate rheological properties. Through simulated data we demonstrate that 
this method removes directed motion and performs equally well when there is no 
directed motion, with an average percent error of <1%. We use this method to 
measure glycerol-water mixtures to show the capability to measure a range of 
materials. Finally, we use this technique to characterize the compliance of 
human sputum. We also investigate the effect of a liquefaction agent used to 
prepare sputum for diagnostic purposes. Our results suggest that the addition of 
high concentration sodium hydroxide increases sample heterogeneity by increasing 
the maximum observed creep compliance.

DOI: 10.1007/s10439-012-0721-2
PMCID: PMC3763957
PMID: 23271563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Behav Brain Sci. 2005 Apr;28(2):169-94; discussion 194-245. doi: 
10.1017/s0140525x0500004x.

Bridging emotion theory and neurobiology through dynamic systems modeling.

Lewis MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development andApplied Psychology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontano, M5S 1V6, Canada. mlewis@oise.utoronto.ca

Efforts to bridge emotion theory with neurobiology can be facilitated by dynamic 
systems (DS) modeling. DS principles stipulate higher-order wholes emerging from 
lower-order constituents through bidirectional causal processes--offering a 
common language for psychological and neurobiological models. After identifying 
some limitations of mainstream emotion theory, I apply DS principles to 
emotion-cognition relations. I then present a psychological model based on this 
reconceptualization, identifying trigger, self-amplification, and 
self-stabilization phases of emotion-appraisal states, leading to consolidating 
traits. The article goes on to describe neural structures and functions involved 
in appraisal and emotion, as well as DS mechanisms of integration by which they 
interact. These mechanisms include nested feedback interactions, global effects 
of neuromodulation, vertical integration, action-monitoring, and synaptic 
plasticity, and they are modeled in terms of both functional integration and 
temporal synchronization. I end by elaborating the psychological model of 
emotion-appraisal states with reference to neural processes.

DOI: 10.1017/s0140525x0500004x
PMID: 16201458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Dec 13;2021:9102095. doi: 10.1155/2021/9102095. 
eCollection 2021.

Network Management System for IoT Based on Dynamic Systems.

Alsaffar M(1), Hamad AA(2), Alshammari A(1), Alshammari G(1), Almurayziq TS(1), 
Mohammed MS(3), Enbeyle W(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science and Engineering, Department of Computer Science 
and Information, University of Ha'il, Saudi Arabia.
(2)College of Sciences, Department of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Tikrit 
University, Iraq.
(3)Ministry of Education, Iraq.
(4)Department of Statistics, Mizan-Tepi University, Ethiopia.

Retraction in
    Comput Math Methods Med. 2023 Dec 13;2023:9753423. doi: 
10.1155/2023/9753423.

The Internet of Things (IoT) has the potential to transform the public sector by 
combining the leading technical and business trends of mobility, automation, and 
data analysis to dramatically alter the way public bodies collect data and 
information. Embedded sensors, actuators, and other devices that capture and 
transmit information about network activity in real-time are used in the 
Internet of Things to connect networks of physical objects. The design of a 
network management system for an IoT network is presented in this paper, which 
uses the edge computing model. This design is based on the Internet management 
model, which uses the SNMP protocol to communicate between managed devices, and 
a gateway, which uses the SOAP protocol to communicate with a management 
application. This work allowed for the identification and analysis of the 
primary network management system initiatives for IoT networks, in which there 
are four fundamental device management requirements for any deployment of IoT 
devices: provisioning and authentication, configuration and control, monitoring 
and diagnostics, and software updates and maintenance.

Copyright © 2021 Mohammad Alsaffar et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/9102095
PMCID: PMC8687763
PMID: 34938357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


119. Sensors (Basel). 2015 Nov 5;15(11):28031-51. doi: 10.3390/s151128031.

State Tracking and Fault Diagnosis for Dynamic Systems Using Labeled Uncertainty 
Graph.

Zhou G(1), Feng W(2), Zhao Q(3), Zhao H(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 
100191, China. zhouganterry@hotmail.com.
(2)School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 
100191, China. buaafwq@buaa.edu.cn.
(3)School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 
100191, China. zhaoqi@buaa.edu.cn.
(4)School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 
100191, China. bhzhb@buaa.edu.cn.

Cyber-physical systems such as autonomous spacecraft, power plants and 
automotive systems become more vulnerable to unanticipated failures as their 
complexity increases. Accurate tracking of system dynamics and fault diagnosis 
are essential. This paper presents an efficient state estimation method for 
dynamic systems modeled as concurrent probabilistic automata. First, the Labeled 
Uncertainty Graph (LUG) method in the planning domain is introduced to describe 
the state tracking and fault diagnosis processes. Because the system model is 
probabilistic, the Monte Carlo technique is employed to sample the probability 
distribution of belief states. In addition, to address the sample impoverishment 
problem, an innovative look-ahead technique is proposed to recursively generate 
most likely belief states without exhaustively checking all possible successor 
modes. The overall algorithms incorporate two major steps: a roll-forward 
process that estimates system state and identifies faults, and a roll-backward 
process that analyzes possible system trajectories once the faults have been 
detected. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach by applying it to a 
real world domain: the power supply control unit of a spacecraft.

DOI: 10.3390/s151128031
PMCID: PMC4701267
PMID: 26556358


120. Psychol Rev. 2006 Jan;113(1):101-31. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.113.1.101.

Toward a comprehensive model of antisocial development: a dynamic systems 
approach.

Granic I(1), Patterson GR.

Author information:
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, 
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. isabela.granic@sickkids.ca

The purpose of this article is to develop a preliminary comprehensive model of 
antisocial development based on dynamic systems principles. The model is built 
on the foundations of behavioral research on coercion theory. First, the authors 
focus on the principles of multistability, feedback, and nonlinear causality to 
reconceptualize real-time parent-child and peer processes. Second, they model 
the mechanisms by which these real-time processes give rise to negative 
developmental outcomes, which in turn feed back to determine real-time 
interactions. Third, they examine mechanisms of change and stability in early- 
and late-onset antisocial trajectories. Finally, novel clinical designs and 
predictions are introduced. The authors highlight new predictions and present 
studies that have tested aspects of the model

DOI: 10.1037/0033-295X.113.1.101
PMID: 16478303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Chaos. 2023 Aug 1;33(8):083119. doi: 10.1063/5.0164484.

A robust sparse identification method for nonlinear dynamic systems affected by 
non-stationary noise.

Hao Z(1), Yang C(1), Huang K(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Automation, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China.

In the field of science and engineering, identifying the nonlinear dynamics of 
systems from data is a significant yet challenging task. In practice, the 
collected data are often contaminated by noise, which often severely reduce the 
accuracy of the identification results. To address the issue of inaccurate 
identification induced by non-stationary noise in data, this paper proposes a 
method called weighted ℓ1-regularized and insensitive loss function-based sparse 
identification of dynamics. Specifically, the robust identification problem is 
formulated using a sparse identification mathematical model that takes into 
account the presence of non-stationary noise in a quantitative manner. Then, a 
novel weighted ℓ1-regularized and insensitive loss function is proposed to 
account for the nature of non-stationary noise. Compared to traditional loss 
functions like least squares and least absolute deviation, the proposed method 
can mitigate the adverse effects of non-stationary noise and better promote the 
sparsity of results, thereby enhancing the accuracy of identification. Third, to 
overcome the non-smooth nature of the objective function induced by the 
inclusion of loss and regularization terms, a smooth approximation of the 
non-smooth objective function is presented, and the alternating direction 
multiplier method is utilized to develop an efficient optimization algorithm. 
Finally, the robustness of the proposed method is verified by extensive 
experiments under different types of nonlinear dynamical systems. Compared to 
some state-of-the-art methods, the proposed method achieves better 
identification accuracy.

© 2023 Author(s). Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0164484
PMID: 37549114


122. J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ. 2015 Apr;20(2):115-24. doi: 10.1093/deafed/enu040. Epub 
2014 Dec 10.

Comparisons of social competence in young children with and without hearing 
loss: a dynamic systems framework.

Hoffman MF(1), Quittner AL(2), Cejas I(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Miami and mikefhoffman@gmail.com.
(2)University of Miami and.
(3)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

This study compared levels of social competence and language development in 74 
young children with hearing loss and 38 hearing peers aged 2.5-5.3 years. This 
study was the first to examine the relationship between oral language and social 
competence using a dynamic systems framework in children with and without 
hearing loss. We hypothesized that, due to deficits in oral language, children 
who were deaf would display lower levels of social competence than their hearing 
peers. Furthermore, language age would predict social competence scores. Social 
competence was measured with a general and deaf-specific measure. Results showed 
that children with hearing loss performed significantly worse than hearing peers 
on the general measure but better than the norms on the deaf-specific measure. 
Controlling for maternal education and income, regression analyses indicated 
that hearing status and language age predicted social competence in both groups. 
Among children with hearing loss, correlations were also found between age at 
diagnosis, age at amplification, and two of the general social competence 
measures. Results supported our hypothesis that deficits in language would have 
cascading negative effects on the development of social competence in young deaf 
children. Development of early intervention programs that target both language 
and social skills are needed for this population.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/deafed/enu040
PMCID: PMC4447823
PMID: 25583707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2017 Oct;45(7):1369-1383. doi: 
10.1007/s10802-016-0234-9.

Emotion Coregulation in Mother-Child Dyads: A Dynamic Systems Analysis of 
Children with and without Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Guo Y(1), Garfin DR(2), Ly A(3), Goldberg WA(2).

Author information:
(1)Program in Nursing Science, University of California Irvine, 299D, Berk Hall, 
Irvine, CA, 92697-3959, USA. gyuqing@uci.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology and Social Behavior, University of California 
Irvine, 4201 Social and Behavioral Sciences Gateway, Irvine, CA, 92697-7085, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, 19716, USA.

Few studies have investigated patterns of emotion coregulation in families of 
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) or contrasted the ways in which 
their emotion coregulation patterns differ from families of typically developing 
(TD) children. To address this gap, we used a dynamic systems approach to 
compare flexible structure and emotional content of coregulation between mothers 
and children (3-7 years) with ASD (n = 47) and TD children (n = 26). 
Mother-child play interactions in the home were videotaped and 
emotion-engagement states were coded in micro-level 5-s intervals based on 
behavioral and affective expressions. Analyses indicated that mother-child dyads 
in the ASD group spent more time than dyads in the TD group in mismatched 
emotion-engagement states (e.g., child negative/mother positive), and children 
with ASD spent more time than TD children engaged exclusively with objects. 
Mother-child dyads in the TD group stayed longer in mutual positive engagement 
states. Compared to dyads in the TD group, mother-child dyads in the ASD group 
exhibited greater flexibility (i.e., a wider range of emotional-engagement 
states, more frequent changes in states, and less time in each state). These 
findings suggest that mothers and their children with ASD do not sustain dyadic 
positive engagement patterns in a low-stress environment. Findings confirmed the 
preference of children with ASD for objects over social partners, even when they 
are at home with their mothers, and elucidated a challenging mother-child 
interactional style. Results have implications for mother-child interventions 
aimed at regulating negative emotional states and sustaining positive ones in 
families raising children with ASD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10802-016-0234-9
PMID: 28054313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Front Psychol. 2017 Oct 10;8:1774. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01774. eCollection 
2017.

What the Dynamic Systems Approach Can Offer for Understanding Development: An 
Example of Mid-childhood Reaching.

Golenia L(1), Schoemaker MM(1), Otten E(1), Mouton LJ(1), Bongers RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.

The Dynamic Systems Approach (DSA) to development has been shown to be a 
promising theory to understand developmental changes. In this perspective, we 
use the example of mid-childhood (6- to 10-years of age) reaching to show how 
using the DSA can advance the understanding of development. Mid-childhood is an 
important developmental period that has often been overshadowed by the focus on 
the acquisition of reaching during infancy. This underrepresentation of 
mid-childhood studies is unjustified, as earlier studies showed that important 
developmental changes in mid-childhood reaching occur that refine the skill of 
reaching. We review these studies here for the first time and show that 
different studies revealed different developmental trends, such as non-monotonic 
and linear trends, for variables such as movement time and accuracy at target. 
Unfortunately, proposed explanations for these developmental changes have been 
tailored to individual studies, limiting their scope. Also, explanations were 
focused on a single component or process in the system that supposedly causes 
developmental changes. Here, we propose that the DSA can offer an overarching 
explanation for developmental changes in this research field. According to the 
DSA, motor behavior emerges from interactions of multiple components entailed by 
the person, environment, and task. Changes in all these components can 
potentially contribute to the emerging behavior. We show how the principles of 
change of the DSA can be used as an overarching framework by applying these 
principles not only to development, but also the behavior itself. This 
underlines its applicability to other fields of development.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01774
PMCID: PMC5641353
PMID: 29066996


125. Neural Comput Appl. 2023;35(23):17247-17265. doi: 10.1007/s00521-023-08554-5. 
Epub 2023 Apr 30.

Early detection of COPD patients' symptoms with personal environmental sensors: 
a remote sensing framework using probabilistic latent component analysis with 
linear dynamic systems.

Kolozali Ş(1), Chatzidiakou L(2), Jones R(2), Quint JK(3), Kelly F(4), Barratt 
B(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, 
Colchester, UK.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.

In this study, we present a cohort study involving 106 COPD patients using 
portable environmental sensor nodes with attached air pollution sensors and 
activity-related sensors, as well as daily symptom records and peak flow 
measurements to monitor patients' activity and personal exposure to air 
pollution. This is the first study which attempts to predict COPD symptoms based 
on personal air pollution exposure. We developed a system that can detect COPD 
patients' symptoms one day in advance of symptoms appearing. We proposed using 
the Probabilistic Latent Component Analysis (PLCA) model based on 3-dimensional 
and 4-dimensional spectral dictionary tensors for personalised and population 
monitoring, respectively. The model is combined with Linear Dynamic Systems 
(LDS) to track the patients' symptoms. We compared the performance of PLCA and 
PLCA-LDS models against Random Forest models in the identification of COPD 
patients' symptoms, since tree-based classifiers were used for remote monitoring 
of COPD patients in the literature. We found that there was a significant 
difference between the classifiers, symptoms and the personalised versus 
population factors. Our results show that the proposed PLCA-LDS-3D model 
outperformed the PLCA and the RF models between 4 and 20% on average. When we 
used only air pollutants as input, the PLCA-LDS-3D forecasting results in 
personalised and population models were 48.67 and 36.33% accuracy for worsening 
of lung capacity and 38.67 and 19% accuracy for exacerbation of COPD patients' 
symptoms, respectively. We have shown that indicators of the quality of an 
individual's environment, specifically air pollutants, are as good predictors of 
the worsening of respiratory symptoms in COPD patients as a direct measurement.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1007/s00521-023-08554-5
PMCID: PMC10338599
PMID: 37455834


126. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):56-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00323.x.

Reorganization in coping behavior at 1 1/2 years: dynamic systems and normative 
change.

Lewis MD(1), Zimmerman S, Hollenstein T, Lamey AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Applied Psychology, Ontario Institute for 
Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Canada. mlewis@oise.utoronto.ca

By the age of 1 year toddlers demonstrate distinct coping habits for dealing 
with frustration. However, these habits may be open to change and reorganization 
at subsequent developmental junctures. We investigated change in coping habits 
at 18-20 months, a normative age for major advances in social cognition, 
focusing on the dynamic systems principles of fluctuation and novelty at 
transitions. Specifically, we asked whether month-to-month fluctuation, novel 
behavioral habits and real-time variability increased at the age of a normative 
transition, despite individual differences in the content of behavior. Infants 
were given frustrating toys while their mothers sat nearby without helping, on 
monthly visits at 14-25 months (before, during and after the hypothesized 
transition). State space grids representing patterns of behavioral durations 
were constructed for each episode and compared over age. As predicted, 
month-to-month fluctuation in grid patterns increased temporarily between 17 and 
20 months, partly independently of a concurrent peak in distress, and new 
behavioral habits replaced old ones at the same age. Coping habits changed 
differently for high-and low-distressed toddlers. However, changes in real-time 
variability did not generally meet our expectations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00323.x
PMID: 15323119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Couns Psychol. 2016 Jul;63(4):379-95. doi: 10.1037/cou0000150. Epub 2016 May 
12.

A dynamic systems approach to psychotherapy: A meta-theoretical framework for 
explaining psychotherapy change processes.

Gelo OC(1), Salvatore S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of History, Social Sciences, and Human Studies, University of 
Salento.

Notwithstanding the many methodological advances made in the field of 
psychotherapy research, at present a metatheoretical, school-independent 
framework to explain psychotherapy change processes taking into account their 
dynamic and complex nature is still lacking. Over the last years, several 
authors have suggested that a dynamic systems (DS) approach might provide such a 
framework. In the present paper, we review the main characteristics of a DS 
approach to psychotherapy. After an overview of the general principles of the DS 
approach, we describe the extent to which psychotherapy can be considered as a 
self-organizing open complex system, whose developmental change processes are 
described in terms of a dialectic dynamics between stability and change over 
time. Empirical evidence in support of this conceptualization is provided and 
discussed. Finally, we propose a research design strategy for the empirical 
investigation of psychotherapy from a DS approach, together with a research case 
example. We conclude that a DS approach may provide a metatheoretical, 
school-independent framework allowing us to constructively rethink and enhance 
the way we conceptualize and empirically investigate psychotherapy. (PsycINFO 
Database Record

(c) 2016 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/cou0000150
PMID: 27177027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Neuroimage. 2008 Jul 1;41(3):849-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.02.054. Epub 
2008 Mar 10.

DEM: a variational treatment of dynamic systems.

Friston KJ(1), Trujillo-Barreto N, Daunizeau J.

Author information:
(1)The Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College London, 
United Kingdom. k.friston@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk <k.friston@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk>

This paper presents a variational treatment of dynamic models that furnishes 
time-dependent conditional densities on the path or trajectory of a system's 
states and the time-independent densities of its parameters. These are obtained 
by maximising a variational action with respect to conditional densities, under 
a fixed-form assumption about their form. The action or path-integral of 
free-energy represents a lower bound on the model's log-evidence or marginal 
likelihood required for model selection and averaging. This approach rests on 
formulating the optimisation dynamically, in generalised coordinates of motion. 
The resulting scheme can be used for online Bayesian inversion of nonlinear 
dynamic causal models and is shown to outperform existing approaches, such as 
Kalman and particle filtering. Furthermore, it provides for dual and triple 
inferences on a system's states, parameters and hyperparameters using exactly 
the same principles. We refer to this approach as dynamic expectation 
maximisation (DEM).

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.02.054
PMID: 18434205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. IEEE Trans Haptics. 2009 Jan-Mar;2(1):40-51. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2008.21. Epub 2008 
Nov 25.

Passive and Active Discrimination of Natural Frequency of Virtual Dynamic 
Systems.

Israr A, Yanfang Li, Patoglu V, O'Malley MK.

It has been shown that humans use combined feedforward and feedback control 
strategies when manipulating external dynamic systems, and when exciting virtual 
dynamic systems at resonance, that they can tune their control parameters in 
response to changing natural frequencies. We present a study to determine the 
discrimination thresholds for the natural frequency of such resonant dynamic 
systems. Weber fractions (WFs in %) are reported for the discrimination of 1, 2, 
4, and 8 Hz natural frequencies. Participants were instructed either to 
passively perceive or actively excite the virtual system via a one 
degree-of-freedom haptic interface with visual and/or haptic feedback. The 
average WF for natural frequency ranged from 4% to 8.5% for 1,2, and 4 Hz 
reference natural frequencies, while the WF was approximately 20% for systems 
with a reference natural frequency of 8 Hz. Results indicate that sensory 
feedback modality has a significant effect on WF during passive perception, but 
no significant effect in the active perception case. The data also suggest that 
discrimination sensitivity is not significantly affected by excitation mode. 
Finally, results for systems with equivalent natural frequencies but different 
spring stiffness indicate that participants do not discriminate natural 
frequency based on the maximum force magnitude perceived.

DOI: 10.1109/TOH.2008.21
PMID: 27788095


130. Front Syst Neurosci. 2012 Jan 18;5:104. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2011.00104. 
eCollection 2011.

Effective Connectivity Modeling for fMRI: Six Issues and Possible Solutions 
Using Linear Dynamic Systems.

Smith JF(1), Pillai A, Chen K, Horwitz B.

Author information:
(1)Brain Imaging and Modeling Section, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA.

Analysis of directionally specific or causal interactions between regions in 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data has proliferated. Here we 
identify six issues with existing effective connectivity methods that need to be 
addressed. The issues are discussed within the framework of linear dynamic 
systems for fMRI (LDSf). The first concerns the use of deterministic models to 
identify inter-regional effective connectivity. We show that deterministic 
dynamics are incapable of identifying the trial-to-trial variability typically 
investigated as the marker of connectivity while stochastic models can capture 
this variability. The second concerns the simplistic (constant) connectivity 
modeled by most methods. Connectivity parameters of the LDSf model can vary at 
the same timescale as the input data. Further, extending LDSf to mixtures of 
multiple models provides more robust connectivity variation. The third concerns 
the correct identification of the network itself including the number and 
anatomical origin of the network nodes. Augmentation of the LDSf state space can 
identify additional nodes of a network. The fourth concerns the locus of the 
signal used as a "node" in a network. A novel extension LDSf incorporating 
sparse canonical correlations can select most relevant voxels from an 
anatomically defined region based on connectivity. The fifth concerns connection 
interpretation. Individual parameter differences have received most attention. 
We present alternative network descriptors of connectivity changes which 
consider the whole network. The sixth concerns the temporal resolution of fMRI 
data relative to the timescale of the inter-regional interactions in the brain. 
LDSf includes an "instantaneous" connection term to capture connectivity 
occurring at timescales faster than the data resolution. The LDS framework can 
also be extended to statistically combine fMRI and EEG data. The LDSf framework 
is a promising foundation for effective connectivity analysis.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2011.00104
PMCID: PMC3260563
PMID: 22279430


131. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2025 Dec 17;PP. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3642820. Online ahead of print.

Adaptive Frequency-Based Constructive Wavelet Neural Network for Nonlinear 
Dynamic Systems.

Huang D, Shen D, Lu L, Tan Y.

Neural networks (NNs) have gained significant popularity for modeling complex, 
nonlinear systems due to their powerful approximation capabilities. However, 
designing an appropriate network structure and tuning parameters remains 
challenging, especially for nonlinear dynamic systems where offline training 
data are unavailable and poor approximations from badly tuned NNs can cause 
instability. This article presents a novel adaptive frequency-based constructive 
wavelet NN (AFBCWNN) for tracking reference trajectories for a class of unknown 
nonlinear dynamic systems. Using online measurements, the AFBCWNN integrates 
adaptive weight updating, adjustable network structures, and rigorous stability 
analysis using Lyapunov techniques. Unlike conventional methods, the proposed 
AFBCWNN leverages frequency-domain analysis to estimate the energy distribution 
of the unknown nonlinear mapping from measured data. This frequency-based 
approach provides a uniform design guideline for network initialization, 
enabling the network to dynamically add wavelet bases when the desired accuracy 
is not achieved and prune nonenergy-active (low-energy) bases, reducing 
computational cost without compromising accuracy. Rigorous stability analysis 
establishes conditions for uniformly bounded trajectories, and simulation 
results confirm the AFBCWNN's superior performance in capturing complex, 
nonlinear dynamics compared to the existing adaptive methods.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3642820
PMID: 41406261


132. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2025 Dec;55(12):5633-5649. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2025.3586643.

Incremental Learning-Enabled Fault Diagnosis of Dynamic Systems: A Comprehensive 
Review.

Liu Z, He X, Huang B, Zhou D.

Effective fault diagnosis is crucial for maintaining the reliability and safety 
of industrial systems. Incremental learning, which enables models to 
continuously update and adapt to new data or emerging fault classes without 
complete retraining, has recently gained attention as a promising solution for 
addressing nonstationary data streams in fault diagnosis applications. 
Nevertheless, most existing review articles on fault diagnosis adopt a broad 
perspective, primarily discussing general techniques such as deep learning and 
transfer learning, without providing a dedicated focus on incremental learning 
strategies. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first review focusing 
specifically on incremental learning-enabled fault diagnosis methods. In this 
work, state-of-the-art incremental learning-enabled fault diagnosis are 
systematically reviewed. These methods are categorized into distinct groups 
based on their incremental learning strategies and application contexts. In 
addition, major challenges associated with applying incremental learning to 
fault diagnosis, including concept drift and catastrophic forgetting, are 
discussed, along with emerging solutions proposed to address these issues. A 
novel taxonomy and perspective on incremental learning-enabled fault diagnosis 
approaches is presented, providing a timely and comprehensive reference for 
researchers and practitioners in this evolving field.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2025.3586643
PMID: 40737141


133. Dev Psychol. 2011 May;47(3):820-33. doi: 10.1037/a0021811.

The interplay between language, gesture, and affect during communicative 
transition: a dynamic systems approach.

Parladé MV(1), Iverson JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, 210 South Bouquet Street, 
3211 Sennott Square, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA. mvp15@pitt.edu

From a dynamic systems perspective, transition points in development are times 
of increased instability, during which behavioral patterns are susceptible to 
temporary decoupling. This study investigated the impact of the vocabulary spurt 
on existing patterns of communicative coordination. Eighteen typically 
developing infants were videotaped at home 1 month before, at, and after the 
vocabulary spurt. Infants were identified as spurters if they underwent a 
discrete phase transition in vocabulary development (marked by an inflection 
point), and compared with a group of nonspurters whose word-learning rates 
followed a trajectory of continuous change. Relative to surrounding sessions, 
there were significant reductions in overall coordination of communicative 
behaviors and in words produced in coordination at the vocabulary spurt session 
for infants who experienced more dramatic vocabulary growth. In contrast, 
nonspurters demonstrated little change across sessions. Findings underscore the 
importance of transitions as opportunities for observing processes of 
developmental change.

(c) 2011 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0021811
PMCID: PMC3521584
PMID: 21219063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Feb 27;14(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-00910-5.

A dynamic systems view of clinical genomics: a rich picture of the landscape in 
Australia using a complexity science lens.

Long JC(1)(2), Gul H(3)(4), McPherson E(3), Best S(3)(4)(5), Augustsson H(3)(6), 
Churruca K(3), Ellis LA(3), Braithwaite J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia. janet.long@mq.edu.au.
(2)Australian Genomics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Australia. janet.long@mq.edu.au.
(3)Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(4)Australian Genomics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(5)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Medical Management Centre, Department of Learning, Informatics, Management 
and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Clinical genomics represents a paradigm shifting change to health 
service delivery and practice across many conditions and life-stages. 
Introducing this complex technology into an already complex health system is a 
significant challenge that cannot be managed in a reductionist way. To build 
robust and sustainable, high quality delivery systems we need to step back and 
view the interconnected landscape of policymakers, funders, managers, 
multidisciplinary teams of clinicians, patients and their families, and health 
care, research, education, and philanthropic institutions as a dynamic whole. 
This study holistically mapped the landscape of clinical genomics within 
Australia by developing a complex graphic: a rich picture. Using complex systems 
theory, we then identified key features, challenges and leverage points of 
implementing clinical genomics.
METHODS: We used a multi-stage, exploratory, qualitative approach. We extracted 
data from grey literature, empirical literature, and data collected by the 
Australian Genomic Health Alliance. Nine key informants working in clinical 
genomics critiqued early drafts of the picture, and validated the final version.
RESULTS: The final graphic depicts 24 stakeholder groups relevant to 
implementation of genomics into Australia. Clinical genomics lies at the 
intersection of four nested systems, with interplay between government, 
professional bodies and patient advocacy groups. Barriers and uncertainties are 
also shown. Analysis using complexity theory showed far-reaching 
interdependencies around funding, and identified unintended consequences.
CONCLUSION: The rich picture of the clinical genomic landscape in Australia is 
the first to show key stakeholders, agencies and processes and their 
interdependencies. Participants who critiqued our results were instantly 
intrigued and engaged by the graphics, searching for their place in the whole 
and often commenting on insights they gained from seeing the influences and 
impacts of other stakeholder groups on their own work. Funding patterns showed 
unintended consequences of increased burdens for clinicians and inequity of 
access for patients. Showing the system as a dynamic whole is the only way to 
understand key drivers and barriers to largescale interventions.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Not applicable.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-00910-5
PMCID: PMC7912922
PMID: 33639930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no competing 
interests.


135. Soc Sci Med. 2012 Jun;74(11):1693-702. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.06.027. 
Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Sexing the baby: Part 2--Applying dynamic systems theory to the emergences of 
sex-related differences in infants and toddlers.

Fausto-Sterling A(1), Coll CG, Lamarre M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Meeting Street Box G, Providence, RI 02912, USA. 
anne_fausto-sterling@brown.edu

During the first three years of life, children acquire knowledge about their own 
gender and the gendered nature of their environment. At the same time, 
sex-related behavioral differences emerge. How are we to understand the 
processes by which bodily differentiation, behavioral differentiation and 
gendered knowledge intertwine to produce male and female, masculine and 
feminine? In this article, we describe four central developmental systems 
concepts applied by psychologists to the study of early human development and 
develop them in enough depth to show how they play out, and what sort of 
knowledge-gathering strategies they require. The general theoretical approach to 
understanding the emergence of bodily/behavioral difference has broad 
applicability for the health sciences and for the study of gender disparities. 
Using dynamic systems theory will deepen and extend the reach of theories of 
embodiment current in the health sciences literature.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.06.027
PMID: 21862195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Sensors (Basel). 2014 Oct 15;14(10):19176-99. doi: 10.3390/s141019176.

Platform for real-time simulation of dynamic systems and hardware-in-the-loop 
for control algorithms.

de Souza ID(1), Silva SN(2), Teles RM(3), Fernandes MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering and Automation, Center of Technology, 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte-UFRN, Natal 59078-970, Brazil. 
isaacdiego@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering and Automation, Center of Technology, 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte-UFRN, Natal 59078-970, Brazil.
(3)Department of Computer Engineering and Automation, Center of Technology, 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte-UFRN, Natal 59078-970, Brazil. 
rmteles@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Computer Engineering and Automation, Center of Technology, 
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte-UFRN, Natal 59078-970, Brazil. 
mfernandes@dca.ufrn.br.

The development of new embedded algorithms for automation and control of 
industrial equipment usually requires the use of real-time testing. However, the 
equipment required is often expensive, which means that such tests are often not 
viable. The objective of this work was therefore to develop an embedded platform 
for the distributed real-time simulation of dynamic systems. This platform, 
called the Real-Time Simulator for Dynamic Systems (RTSDS), could be applied in 
both industrial and academic environments. In industrial applications, the RTSDS 
could be used to optimize embedded control algorithms. In the academic sphere, 
it could be used to support research into new embedded solutions for automation 
and control and could also be used as a tool to assist in undergraduate and 
postgraduate teaching related to the development of projects concerning on-board 
control systems.

DOI: 10.3390/s141019176
PMCID: PMC4239941
PMID: 25320906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2012 Jun;46(2):243-8. doi: 10.1007/s12124-011-9170-y.

What is the most creative thing you have ever seen? "Useful" is the new 
"Valuable" and dynamic systems are the key!

Gruber C(1).

Author information:
(1)American University, Washington, DC, USA. cgruber@american.edu

Creativity has been described by many as something which we all can recognize, 
yet few can completely and sufficiently define. In a discussion of Glăveanu's 
(2011) Creating Creativity, further topics and questions, such as pragmatism and 
neopragmatism as well as the nature of creativity studies are explored. Using 
the medium of Glăveanu's research on creativity and Romanian Easter Egg 
decorating, this article expands the discussion of pragmatism, neopragmatism and 
the future of research surrounding creativity. This future can be addressed by 
exploring the nature of the interconnectedness of creativity and cognition via 
dynamic systems approaches. To enhance this viewpoint, a brief discussion of 
dynamic systems theory is brought in to supplement the enhanced discussion of 
pragmatism and the nature of the usefulness of creativity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-011-9170-y
PMID: 21603924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2004 Dec;32(6):665-71. doi: 
10.1023/b:jacp.0000047214.03516.8b.

Trouble ahead: predicting antisocial trajectories with dynamic systems concepts 
and methods.

Lewis MD(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. mlewis@oise.utoronto.ca

This paper reviews and evaluates a set of studies that utilize dynamic systems 
(DS) principles, and in two cases dynamic systems methods, for predicting 
antisocial development and other behavioral outcomes. I suggest that the 
emphasis of DS approaches on process and nonlinear causation is very different 
from the emphasis in developmental psychopathology on prediction, yet the 
marriage of these approaches is necessary to capture the complex interactions 
that give rise to problematic trajectories. The studies reviewed do indeed 
uncover predictive relations that would have been difficult to conceptualize or 
impossible to find using more traditional strategies. In discussing these 
studies. I suggest DS interpretations of emerging individual differences, 
phase-specific change, sleeper effects, mediating variables, and behavioral 
rigidity versus malleability, in the context of developmental prediction. I also 
discuss the advantages of moving from DS concepts to DS methods in 
clinical-developmental research.

DOI: 10.1023/b:jacp.0000047214.03516.8b
PMID: 15648532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Front Psychol. 2021 Dec 31;12:799418. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.799418. 
eCollection 2021.

An Ecological Study of Identity in Teaching English as a Foreign Language in 
Light of the Dynamic Systems Model of Role Identity.

Wang R(1), Elahi Shirvan M(2), Taherian T(3).

Author information:
(1)Changchun Institute of Technology, Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Foreign Languages, University of Bojnord, Bojnord, Iran.
(3)English Language Department, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran.

Influenced by the growing urge of investigating the combined nature of teacher 
identity with the dynamic teacher professional learning processes in recent 
years, the present study aimed to cast an ecological look at identity role 
construction and change in L2 teaching. To this aim, Dynamic Systems Model of 
Role Identity (DSMRI) meta-theoretical framework was employed with the 
centrality of social-cultural roles in framing an EFL teacher's experiences and 
guiding actions. In a single-case study, a Chinese EFL teacher's dynamic 
construction of identity (as a single-case design) was traced in three phases: 
before a practicum (teacher professional development program), during the 
practicum, and during the first year of teaching. A triangulation of data was 
used to ensure the adequacy and representativeness of the required data. The 
data were analyzed qualitatively to find traces of change and development in the 
teacher's ontological beliefs, goals, self-perceptions, and action 
possibilities. The DSMRI-oriented analysis of pre-, mid-, and post-practicum 
data emphasized the traces of role identities of the teacher trainee in her 
professional development process, that also created both emerging patterns and 
emerging challenges in her role, fostering a more negotiated, adaptive and 
realistic teacher role identity. This study substantiated the usefulness of the 
DSMRI for viewing language teachers' professional development and the dynamic 
identity development processes as several temporal and situated factors 
contribute to the alignment or misalignment of a teacher's ontological beliefs, 
goals, self-perceptions, and action possibilities.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Elahi Shirvan and Taherian.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.799418
PMCID: PMC8758575
PMID: 35035374

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


140. ISA Trans. 2023 Sep;140:170-182. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2023.06.003. Epub 2023 
Jun 5.

Recurrent general type-2 fuzzy neural networks for nonlinear dynamic systems 
identification.

El-Nagar AM(1), El-Bardini M(2), Khater AA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menofia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: ahmed.elnagar@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menofia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: dralbardini@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menofia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: abdelaziz.khater@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.

This paper introduces a recurrent general type-2 Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy neural 
network (RGT2-TSKFNN) for the identification of nonlinear systems. In the 
proposed structure, the general type-2 fuzzy set (GT2FS) and a recurrent fuzzy 
neural network (RFNN) are combined to obviate the data uncertainties. The fuzzy 
firing strengths in the developed structure are returned to the network input as 
internal variables. In the proposed structure, GT2FS is utilized to characterize 
the antecedent parts while the consequent parts are performed using TSK type. 
The issues of constructing a RGT2-TSKFNN involve type reduction, structure 
learning as well as parameter learning. An efficient strategy is developed by 
utilizing alpha-cuts to decompose a GT2FS into several interval type-2 fuzzy 
sets (IT2FSs). In order to solve the computation time of the type-reduction 
issue, a direct defuzzification method is used instead of iterative nature of 
Karnik-Mendel​ (KM) algorithm. Type-2 fuzzy clustering and Lyapunov criteria are 
utilized for online structure learning as well as the antecedent and consequent 
parameters, respectively for reducing the number of rules and guaranteeing the 
stability of the proposed RGT2-TSKFNN. The reported comparative analysis of the 
simulation results is utilized to estimate the performance of the proposed 
RGT2-TSKFNN with respect to other popular type-2 FNNs (T2FNNs) methodologies.

Copyright © 2023 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2023.06.003
PMID: 37328315

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


141. Behav Brain Sci. 2019 Dec 12;42:e255. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X19000499.

Updating the dual systems model of temporal cognition: Reasoning with dynamic 
systems theory.

Hohenberger A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Science, Osnabrück University, D-49090Osnabrück, 
Germany. 
annette.hohenberger@uni-osnabrueck.dehttps://www.ikw.uosde/en/the_institute/staff/ahohenberger/.

Comment in
    Behav Brain Sci. 2019 Dec 12;42:e278. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X19001195.

Comment on
    Behav Brain Sci. 2018 Sep 25;42:e244. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X18002157.

This commentary construes the relation between the two systems of temporal 
updating and temporal reasoning as a bifurcation and tracks it across three time 
scales: phylogeny, ontogeny, and microgeny. In taking a dynamic systems 
approach, flexibility, as mentioned by Hoerl & McCormack, is revealed as the key 
characteristic of human temporal cognition.

DOI: 10.1017/S0140525X19000499
PMID: 31826766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2007 Jan;387(1):71-82. doi: 10.1007/s00216-006-0917-0. Epub 
2006 Dec 12.

Monitoring dynamic systems with multiparameter fluorescence imaging.

Kudryavtsev V(1), Felekyan S, Woźniak AK, König M, Sandhagen C, Kühnemuth R, 
Seidel CA, Oesterhelt F.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Molekulare Physikalische Chemie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität 
Düsseldorf, Universitätsstrasse 1, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.

A new general strategy based on the use of multiparameter fluorescence detection 
(MFD) to register and quantitatively analyse fluorescence images is introduced. 
Multiparameter fluorescence imaging (MFDi) uses pulsed excitation, 
time-correlated single-photon counting and a special pixel clock to 
simultaneously monitor the changes in the eight-dimensional fluorescence 
information (fundamental anisotropy, fluorescence lifetime, fluorescence 
intensity, time, excitation spectrum, fluorescence spectrum, fluorescence 
quantum yield, distance between fluorophores) in real time. The three spatial 
coordinates are also stored. The most statistically efficient techniques known 
from single-molecule spectroscopy are used to estimate fluorescence parameters 
of interest for all pixels, not just for the regions of interest. Their 
statistical significance is judged from a stack of two-dimensional histograms. 
In this way, specific pixels can be selected for subsequent pixel-based 
subensemble analysis in order to improve the statistical accuracy of the 
parameters estimated. MFDi avoids the need for sequential measurements, because 
the registered data allow one to perform many analysis techniques, such as 
fluorescence-intensity distribution analysis (FIDA) and fluorescence correlation 
spectroscopy (FCS), in an off-line mode. The limitations of FCS for counting 
molecules and monitoring dynamics are discussed. To demonstrate the ability of 
our technique, we analysed two systems: (i) interactions of the fluorescent dye 
Rhodamine 110 inside and outside of a glutathione sepharose bead, and (ii) 
microtubule dynamics in live yeast cells of Schizosaccharomyces pombe using a 
fusion protein of Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) with Minichromosome Altered 
Loss Protein 3 (Mal3), which is involved in the dynamic cycle of polymerising 
and depolymerising microtubules.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-006-0917-0
PMID: 17160654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Entropy (Basel). 2021 Jan 29;23(2):169. doi: 10.3390/e23020169.

U-Model-Based Two-Degree-of-Freedom Internal Model Control of Nonlinear Dynamic 
Systems.

Li R(1), Zhu Q(1), Narayan P(1), Yue A(1), Yao Y(1), Deng M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering Design and Mathematics, University of the West of 
England, Frenchay Campus, Coldharbour Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK.
(2)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Tokyo University of 
Agriculture and Technology, 2-24-16 Nakacho, Koganei, Tokyo 183-8538, Japan.

This paper proposes a U-Model-Based Two-Degree-of-Freedom Internal Model Control 
(UTDF-IMC) structure with strength in nonlinear dynamic inversion, and 
separation of tracking design and robustness design. This approach can 
effectively accommodate modeling error and disturbance while removing those 
widely used linearization techniques for nonlinear plants/processes. To assure 
the expansion and applications, it analyses the key properties associated with 
the UTDF-IMC. For initial benchmark testing, computational experiments are 
conducted using MATLAB/Simulink for two mismatched linear and nonlinear plants. 
Further tests consider an industrial system, in which the IMC of a Permanent 
Magnet Synchronous Motor (PMSM) is simulated to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
the design procedure for potential industrial applications.

DOI: 10.3390/e23020169
PMCID: PMC7911916
PMID: 33573073

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


144. PLoS One. 2024 Oct 16;19(10):e0311734. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0311734. 
eCollection 2024.

Optimizing prediction accuracy in dynamic systems through neural network 
integration with Kalman and alpha-beta filters.

Khan J(1), Zaman U(2), Lee E(2)(3), Balobaid AS(4), Aburasain RY(4), Bilal M(5), 
Kim K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental IT Engineering, Chungnam National University, 
Daejeon, South Korea.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 
South Korea.
(3)Autonomous Ship Research Center, Samsung Heavy Industries, Daejeon, South 
Korea.
(4)School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, WA, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Computer Science, College of Engineering and Computer Science, 
Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.

In the realm of dynamic system analysis, the Kalman filter and the alpha-beta 
filter are widely recognized for their tracking and prediction capabilities. 
However, their performance is often limited by static parameters that cannot 
adapt to changing conditions. Addressing this limitation, this paper introduces 
innovative neural network-based prediction models that enhance the adaptability 
and accuracy of these conventional filters. Our approach involves the 
integration of neural networks within the filtering algorithms, enabling the 
dynamic augmentation of parameters in response to performance feedback. We 
present two modified filters: a neural network-based Kalman filter and an 
alpha-beta filter, each augmented to incorporate neural network-driven parameter 
tuning. The alpha-beta filter is enhanced with neural network outputs for its α 
and β parameters, while the Kalman filter employs a neural network to optimize 
its internal parameter R and noise factor F. We assess these advanced models 
using the root mean square error (RMSE) metric, where our neural network-based 
alpha-beta filter demonstrates a significant 38.2% improvement in prediction 
accuracy, and the neural network-based Kalman filter achieves a 53.4% 
enhancement. Hence, our novel approach of integrating neural networks into 
filtering algorithms stands out as an effective strategy to significantly 
enhance their performance in dynamic environments.

Copyright: © 2024 Khan et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0311734
PMCID: PMC11482711
PMID: 39413087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


145. Interface Focus. 2013 Aug 6;3(4):20130019. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2013.0019.

Single timepoint models of dynamic systems.

Sachs K(1), Itani S(2), Fitzgerald J(3), Schoeberl B(3), Nolan GP(1), Tomlin 
CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Stanford University School of 
Medicine , Stanford, CA , USA.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences , University of 
California at Berkeley , Berkeley, CA , USA.
(3)Merrimack Pharmaceuticals , Cambridge, MA , USA.

Many interesting studies aimed at elucidating the connectivity structure of 
biomolecular pathways make use of abundance measurements, and employ statistical 
and information theoretic approaches to assess connectivities. These studies 
often do not address the effects of the dynamics of the underlying biological 
system, yet dynamics give rise to impactful issues such as timepoint selection 
and its effect on structure recovery. In this work, we study conditions for 
reliable retrieval of the connectivity structure of a dynamic system, and the 
impact of dynamics on structure-learning efforts. We encounter an unexpected 
problem not previously described in elucidating connectivity structure from 
dynamic systems, show how this confounds structure learning of the system and 
discuss possible approaches to overcome the confounding effect. Finally, we test 
our hypotheses on an accurate dynamic model of the IGF signalling pathway. We 
use two structure-learning methods at four time points to contrast the 
performance and robustness of those methods in terms of recovering correct 
connectivity.

DOI: 10.1098/rsfs.2013.0019
PMCID: PMC3915837
PMID: 24511382


146. Clin Interv Aging. 2015 Oct 29;10:1755-70. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S91605. eCollection 
2015.

A quantitative dynamic systems model of health-related quality of life among 
older adults.

Roppolo M(1), Kunnen ES(2), van Geert PL(2), Mulasso A(3), Rabaglietti E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy ; Department of 
Developmental Psychology, Rijksuniversiteit of Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, Rijksuniversiteit of Groningen, 
Groningen, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Health-related quality of life (HRQOL) is a person-centered concept. The 
analysis of HRQOL is highly relevant in the aged population, which is generally 
suffering from health decline. Starting from a conceptual dynamic systems model 
that describes the development of HRQOL in individuals over time, this study 
aims to develop and test a quantitative dynamic systems model, in order to 
reveal the possible dynamic trends of HRQOL among older adults. The model is 
tested in different ways: first, with a calibration procedure to test whether 
the model produces theoretically plausible results, and second, with a 
preliminary validation procedure using empirical data of 194 older adults. This 
first validation tested the prediction that given a particular starting point 
(first empirical data point), the model will generate dynamic trajectories that 
lead to the observed endpoint (second empirical data point). The analyses reveal 
that the quantitative model produces theoretically plausible trajectories, thus 
providing support for the calibration procedure. Furthermore, the analyses of 
validation show a good fit between empirical and simulated data. In fact, no 
differences were found in the comparison between empirical and simulated final 
data for the same subgroup of participants, whereas the comparison between 
different subgroups of people resulted in significant differences. These data 
provide an initial basis of evidence for the dynamic nature of HRQOL during the 
aging process. Therefore, these data may give new theoretical and applied 
insights into the study of HRQOL and its development with time in the aging 
population.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S91605
PMCID: PMC4631406
PMID: 26604722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2025 May;55(5):2052-2064. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2025.3547216. 
Epub 2025 Apr 23.

A Dynamic Systems Approach to Modeling Human-Machine Rhythm Interaction.

Yuan Z, Ransbeeck WV, Wiggins GA, Botteldooren D.

Rhythm is an inherent aspect of human behavior, present from infancy and 
embedded in cultural practices. At the core of rhythm perception lies meter 
anticipation, a spontaneous process in the human brain that typically occurs 
before actual beats. This anticipation can be framed as a time series prediction 
problem. From the perspective of human embodied system behavior, although many 
models have been developed for time series prediction, most prioritize accuracy 
over biological realism, contrasting with the natural imprecision of human 
internal clocks. Neuroscientific evidence, such as infants' natural meter 
synchronization, underscores the need for biologically plausible models. 
Therefore, we propose a neuron oscillator-based dynamic system that simulates 
human behavior during meter perception. The model introduces two tunable 
parameters for local and global adjustments, fine-tuning the oscillation 
combinations to emulate human-like rhythmic behavior. The experiments are 
conducted under three common scenarios encountered during human-machine 
interaction, demonstrating that the proposed model can exhibit human-like 
reactions. Additionally, experiments involving human-machine and interhuman 
interactions show that the model successfully replicates real-world rhythmic 
behavior, advancing toward more natural and synchronized human-machine rhythm 
interaction.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2025.3547216
PMID: 40131747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Health Care Qual Assur. 2025 Oct 23;38(4):318-337. doi: 
10.1108/IJHCQA-01-2025-0002.

Dynamic systems modeling for quality improvement in reducing neonatal mortality: 
evidence from Kerman and Bam, Iran.

Amini E(1), Amiresmaili M(2), Torabinejad Z(3), Bagherzadeh MA(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Bam University of Medical Sciences , Bam, Iran.
(2)Health Services Administration, Kerman Medical University , Kerman, Iran.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kerman University of Medical 
Sciences , Kerman, Iran.
(4)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Graduate University of 
Advanced Technology , Kerman, Iran.

PURPOSE: Neonatal mortality is a significant global health issue, particularly 
in low- and middle-income countries. This study aims to identify and understand 
the factors contributing to high neonatal mortality rates in the cities of 
Kerman and Bam, Iran, to develop effective strategies for improvement.
DESIGN/METHODOLOGY/APPROACH: We employed systems dynamics to develop Causal Loop 
Diagrams that capture qualitative interactions among determinants of neonatal 
mortality. These CLDs were transformed into stock and flow diagrams for 
quantitative analysis. Using least squares regression techniques in MATLAB, we 
analyzed 60 months (2017-2021) of historical data from the Iranian Maternal and 
Neonatal database, the Integrated Health System (SIB), and Iran's Statistical 
Yearbooks. Expert interviews and hospital informatics were also utilized to 
enhance the model's robustness.
FINDINGS: The developed model demonstrated a validation accuracy of 
approximately 94% based on Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). Key 
determinants were categorized into health factors (e.g. preterm birth, 
eclampsia), socio-demographic factors (e.g. maternal education, substance 
abuse), and healthcare system factors (e.g. NICU capacity, specialist staff). 
Simulation scenarios revealed that a 20% increase in NICU capacity could reduce 
neonatal mortality by 35% in Bam and 7% in Kerman. Additionally, hiring 15% more 
specialist staff reduced mortality by 10% in Bam and 7% in Kerman.
RESEARCH LIMITATIONS/IMPLICATIONS: While this study is based on data from two 
specific cities, which may limit its applicability to other regions with 
different healthcare infrastructures and socio-economic conditions, the 
integrated qualitative and quantitative methodology employed can be effectively 
applied to other areas and societies. Future research should expand to 
additional regions and incorporate more factors, such as genetic predispositions 
and environmental influences, to enhance the model's generalizability and 
accuracy. The findings provide clear guidance for healthcare policymakers on 
effective resource allocation, such as expanding NICU capacity and training more 
healthcare professionals, to reduce neonatal mortality rates.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: The model offers a robust framework for simulating 
intervention scenarios, enabling data-driven decision-making for optimizing 
healthcare strategies. By reducing neonatal mortality, this research contributes 
to the overall health and well-being of communities, fostering healthier 
families and populations, and leading to long-term societal benefits, including 
enhanced quality of life and economic productivity.
ORIGINALITY/VALUE: This study is among the first in Iran to utilize a 
comprehensive systems dynamics approach to analyze factors affecting neonatal 
mortality. It presents a highly accurate dynamic model that integrates 
qualitative and quantitative data, offering a replicable methodology adaptable 
to other regions facing similar health challenges. The innovative application of 
dynamic systems modeling in neonatal health provides significant contributions 
to healthcare management and public health, supporting global efforts to reduce 
neonatal mortality.

© Emerald Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1108/IJHCQA-01-2025-0002
PMID: 40923870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2021 Mar 8;379(2192):20200242. doi: 
10.1098/rsta.2020.0242. Epub 2021 Jan 18.

The effect of high-frequency stochastic actions on the low-frequency behaviour 
of dynamic systems.

Kremer E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)REC Mekhanobr-tekhnika, V.O., 22 Linija, 3, St Petersburg 199106, Russia.
(2)Institute for Problems in Mechanical Engineering of Russian Academy of 
Sciences, V.O. Bolshoj pr. 61, St Petersburg 199178, Russia.

The dynamic system described by a finite number of first-order differential 
equations is considered. The right side of each equation is a sum of a slow, 
deterministic and, in the general case, nonlinear function of dynamic variables 
and a stochastic excitation. The stochastic action is a superposition of a 
finite number of independent random processes with coefficients depending on 
dynamic variables and slow time. The problem statement is oriented to 
applications in the field of driven systems. The analysis is based on the 
concept of vibration mechanics proposed by I. I. Blekhman. The modified method 
of direct separation of slow and fast motions uses the explicit introduction of 
a small parameter and some ideas of the two-scale technique. The general 
formulas for vibrational forces (or fluxes) are obtained. These additional terms 
appear in the resulting system for averaged motion instead of the stochastic 
terms to make the averaged system equivalent to the initial stochastic system 
with respect to slow motions and, in particular, to low-frequency resonances. As 
an example, the model of a vibration machine for bulk material processing is 
considered. The stochastic effect is caused by random oscillations of the bulk 
material mass. It is transformed into a modification of the machine's frequency 
characteristics leading to a specific stochastic resonance. This article is part 
of the theme issue 'Vibrational and stochastic resonance in driven nonlinear 
systems (part 1)'.

DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2020.0242
PMID: 33455550


150. J Comput Chem. 2002 Oct;23(13):1244-53. doi: 10.1002/jcc.10120.

Accelerated Poisson-Boltzmann calculations for static and dynamic systems.

Luo R(1), David L, Gilson MK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, California 92697-3900, USA.

We report here an efficient implementation of the finite difference 
Poisson-Boltzmann solvent model based on the Modified Incomplete Cholsky 
Conjugate Gradient algorithm, which gives rather impressive performance for both 
static and dynamic systems. This is achieved by implementing the algorithm with 
Eisenstat's two optimizations, utilizing the electrostatic update in 
simulations, and applying prudent approximations, including: relaxing the 
convergence criterion, not updating Poisson-Boltzmann-related forces every step, 
and using electrostatic focusing. It is also possible to markedly accelerate the 
supporting routines that are used to set up the calculations and to obtain 
energies and forces. The resulting finite difference Poisson-Boltzmann method 
delivers efficiency comparable to the distance-dependent dielectric model for a 
system tested, HIV Protease, making it a strong candidate for solution-phase 
molecular dynamics simulations. Further, the finite difference method includes 
all intrasolute electrostatic interactions, whereas the distance dependent 
dielectric calculations use a 15-A cutoff. The speed of our numerical finite 
difference method is comparable to that of the pair-wise Generalized Born 
approximation to the Poisson-Boltzmann method.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcc.10120
PMID: 12210150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2020 Apr;31(4):1297-1309. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2919676. Epub 2019 Jun 24.

Adaptive Global Sliding-Mode Control for Dynamic Systems Using Double Hidden 
Layer Recurrent Neural Network Structure.

Chu Y, Fei J, Hou S.

In this paper, a full-regulated neural network (NN) with a double hidden layer 
recurrent neural network (DHLRNN) structure is designed, and an adaptive global 
sliding-mode controller based on the DHLRNN is proposed for a class of dynamic 
systems. Theoretical guidance and adaptive adjustment mechanism are established 
to set up the base width and central vector of the Gaussian function in the 
DHLRNN structure, where six sets of parameters can be adaptively stabilized to 
their best values according to different inputs. The new DHLRNN can improve the 
accuracy and generalization ability of the network, reduce the number of network 
weights, and accelerate the network training speed due to the strong fitting and 
presentation ability of two-layer activation functions compared with a general 
NN with a single hidden layer. Since the neurons of input layer can receive 
signals which come back from the neurons of output layer in the output feedback 
neural structure, it can possess associative memory and rapid system 
convergence, achieving better approximation and superior dynamic capability. 
Simulation and experiment on an active power filter are carried out to indicate 
the excellent static and dynamic performances of the proposed DHLRNN-based 
adaptive global sliding-mode controller, verifying its best approximation 
performance and the most stable internal state compared with other schemes.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2919676
PMID: 31247575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Sensors (Basel). 2021 Jun 1;21(11):3837. doi: 10.3390/s21113837.

On the Uncertainty Identification for Linear Dynamic Systems Using Stochastic 
Embedding Approach with Gaussian Mixture Models.

Orellana R(1)(2)(3), Carvajal R(1), Escárate P(4), Agüero JC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento Electrónica, Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María (UTFSM), 
Av. España 1680, Valparaíso 2390123, Chile.
(2)Advanced Center for Electrical and Electronic Engineering, AC3E, Av. Matta 
222, Valparaíso 2580129, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Ingeniería Electrica, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad de 
Los Andes, Av. Alberto Carnevalli, Mérida 5101, Venezuela.
(4)Instituto de Electricidad y Electrónica, Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Ingeniería, Universidad Austral de Chile (UACH), Genaral Lagos 2086, Valdivia 
5111187, Chile.

In control and monitoring of manufacturing processes, it is key to understand 
model uncertainty in order to achieve the required levels of consistency, 
quality, and economy, among others. In aerospace applications, models need to be 
very precise and able to describe the entire dynamics of an aircraft. In 
addition, the complexity of modern real systems has turned deterministic models 
impractical, since they cannot adequately represent the behavior of disturbances 
in sensors and actuators, and tool and machine wear, to name a few. Thus, it is 
necessary to deal with model uncertainties in the dynamics of the plant by 
incorporating a stochastic behavior. These uncertainties could also affect the 
effectiveness of fault diagnosis methodologies used to increment the safety and 
reliability in real-world systems. Determining suitable dynamic system models of 
real processes is essential to obtain effective process control strategies and 
accurate fault detection and diagnosis methodologies that deliver good 
performance. In this paper, a maximum likelihood estimation algorithm for the 
uncertainty modeling in linear dynamic systems is developed utilizing a 
stochastic embedding approach. In this approach, system uncertainties are 
accounted for as a stochastic error term in a transfer function. In this paper, 
we model the error-model probability density function as a finite Gaussian 
mixture model. For the estimation of the nominal model and the probability 
density function of the parameters of the error-model, we develop an iterative 
algorithm based on the Expectation-Maximization algorithm using the data from 
independent experiments. The benefits of our proposal are illustrated via 
numerical simulations.

DOI: 10.3390/s21113837
PMCID: PMC8199550
PMID: 34206104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


153. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2019 Jan;87(1):56-66. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000373.

Exploring the temporal dynamics of the interpersonal theory of suicide 
constructs: A dynamic systems modeling approach.

Rogers ML(1), Joiner TE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology.

OBJECTIVE: The interpersonal theory of suicide has contributed to advances in 
the understanding and prevention of suicidal behavior, with over a decade of 
empirical examination. Few studies, however, have used a longitudinal design 
with repeated short-term follow-ups to examine the temporal trajectories of 
perceived burdensomeness, thwarted belongingness, and suicidal ideation, nor 
have any studies to our knowledge investigated the propositions of the 
interpersonal theory of suicide using a dynamic systems theory approach. The 
present study examined the temporal dynamics of perceived burdensomeness, 
thwarted belongingness, and suicidal ideation, as moderated by capability for 
suicide, using dynamic systems modeling analyses in a sample of 91 adults at 
high risk for suicide (Mage = 27.03 years, SD = 8.64; 53.8% female, 44.0% male, 
1.1% nonbinary, 1.1% transgender female).
METHOD: Participants completed brief online self-report measures at 6 
time-points, each 3 days apart.
RESULTS: Results were generally in support of the interpersonal theory of 
suicide: perceived burdensomeness, thwarted belongingness, and suicidal ideation 
exhibited patterns of temporal stability that were accentuated at high levels of 
capability for suicide; perceived burdensomeness and thwarted belongingness 
exhibited a reciprocal temporal pattern, as did perceived burdensomeness and 
suicidal ideation. However, thwarted belongingness did not have an incremental 
influence on suicidal ideation.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these findings provide additional information about the 
nature of suicidal ideation and interpersonal risk factors over time and point 
to nonlinear dynamic systems modeling as an analytic technique that may prove 
useful in understanding trajectories of suicidal thoughts and behaviors. 
(PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/ccp0000373
PMID: 30570302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. ISA Trans. 2022 Nov;130:582-597. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.03.004. Epub 2022 
Mar 14.

Robustness analysis of Adaptive Model Predictive Control for uncertain 
non-linear dynamic systems using s-gap metric concepts.

Saki S(1), Bolandi H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering at Iran University of Science and 
Technology, Iran. Electronic address: saman_saki@elec.iust.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering at Iran University of Science and 
Technology, Iran.

Robustness analysis of adaptive control systems, when operating in a certain 
domain, has been a gulf during the past decades. This problem is more 
complicated in the case of non-linear dynamic systems including un-modelled 
dynamics as unstructured uncertainty. To find a clear solution for this famous 
and interesting problem, limitations and effects of controller operation on 
performance of on-line model identification procedure (and vice versa) must be 
determined. In this paper, as the main novelty, we show that it needs some 
developments and new concepts in robust control theory as the s-gap metric, 
generalized stability margin (GSM) and modifications on the gain bound 
calculation. These achievements help us to present an on-line identification 
method with its convergence proof in sense of the s-gap metric and a relation 
between GSM and identifier convergence area. Therefore, consideration of GSM in 
Adaptive Model Predictive Control (AMPC) cost function concludes a systematic 
solution relating controller robustness and adaptivity, clearly. To this aim, a 
linear matrix inequality (LMI) representation for GSM constraint is suggested. 
Also, the stability of AMPC on a certain operating domain is guaranteed in sense 
of the s-gap metric and GSM. All of these help to determine the attraction area 
of closed loop system and we show that there exists a trade-off between each two 
cases of the attraction area size, convergence area size and robustness of 
closed loop control system. Finally, simulations and experimental results imply 
on correctness of the proposed method.

Copyright © 2022 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.03.004
PMID: 35339276

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


155. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2026 Mar;67(3):429-438. doi: 10.1111/jcpp.70055. 
Epub 2025 Oct 14.

Editorial Perspective: How spreading mental health information can be (un-) 
helpful - a dynamic systems approach.

Marcotulli D(1), Foulkes L(2), Stringaris A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sciences of Public Health and Paediatrics, University of Turin, 
Turin, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Divisions of Psychiatry and Psychology and Language Science, University 
College London, London, UK.

Increasing awareness of mental health problems, including that of young people, 
is generally seen as positive, and many interventions to increase awareness are 
underway internationally. Yet, a principled evaluation of the benefits and harms 
of increasing awareness is still lacking. Here, we present a conceptual 
framework for the evaluation of information interventions that are aimed at 
increasing public awareness of mental health problems. We borrow concepts from 
dynamic systems, such as infection spread and related population growth, to ask 
how benefits, but also harms of information on mental health, may accrue over 
time. We argue that as information spreads, several cascades of events are set 
off that involve members of the general public but also clinicians and 
healthcare services. These cascades entail positive and negative feedback loops. 
We discuss not only how increased diagnoses can lead to positive outcomes (e.g. 
increasing diagnostic rates and appropriate treatments in those who would 
otherwise have remained undiagnosed) but also how increased awareness can lead 
to decreases in diagnostic accuracy, to service overload, and how they may 
expose people to unnecessary or harmful treatments. We argue that the need for a 
framework founded on modelling societal dynamics is needed to ensure that both 
the benefits and the downsides of mental health information are accurately 
gauged and to help the planning of better public health campaigns.

© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Association for Child and Adolescent Mental 
Health.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpp.70055
PMCID: PMC12883590
PMID: 41088568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2019 Feb 26;62(2):215-228. doi: 
10.1044/2018_JSLHR-S-17-0466.

Descriptive Analysis of the Interactive Patterning of the Vocalization 
Subsystems in Healthy Participants: A Dynamic Systems Perspective.

Croake DJ(1), Andreatta RD(1), Stemple JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington.

Purpose Normative data for many objective voice measures are routinely used in 
clinical voice assessment; however, normative data reflect vocal output, but not 
vocalization process. The underlying physiologic processes of healthy phonation 
have been shown to be nonlinear and thus are likely different across 
individuals. Dynamic systems theory postulates that performance behaviors emerge 
from the nonlinear interplay of multiple physiologic components and that certain 
patterns are preferred and loosely governed by the interactions of physiology, 
task, and environment. The purpose of this study was to descriptively 
characterize the interactive nature of the vocalization subsystem triad in 
subjects with healthy voices and to determine if differing subgroups could be 
delineated to better understand how healthy voicing is physiologically 
generated. Method Respiratory kinematic, aerodynamic, and acoustic formant data 
were obtained from 29 individuals with healthy voices (21 female and eight 
male). Multivariate analyses were used to descriptively characterize the 
interactions among the subsystems that contributed to healthy voicing. Results 
Group data revealed representative measures of the 3 subsystems to be generally 
within the boundaries of established normative data. Despite this, 3 distinct 
clusters were delineated that represented 3 subgroups of individuals with 
differing subsystem patterning. Seven of the 9 measured variables in this study 
were found to be significantly different across at least 1 of the 3 subgroups 
indicating differing physiologic processes across individuals. Conclusion Vocal 
output in healthy individuals appears to be generated by distinct and preferred 
physiologic processes that were represented by 3 subgroups indicating that the 
process of vocalization is different among individuals, but not entirely 
idiosyncratic. Possibilities for these differences are explored using the 
framework of dynamic systems theory and the dynamics of emergent behaviors. A 
revised physiologic model of phonation that accounts for differences within and 
among the vocalization subsystems is described. Supplemental Material 
https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.7616462.

DOI: 10.1044/2018_JSLHR-S-17-0466
PMID: 30950696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Infect Dis Model. 2016 Sep 13;1(1):52-70. doi: 10.1016/j.idm.2016.07.002. 
eCollection 2016 Oct.

Controllability and stability analysis of large transcriptomic dynamic systems 
for host response to influenza infection in human.

Sun X(1), Hu F(2), Wu S(3), Qiu X(2), Linel P(3), Wu H(4).

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Core, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of Miami, Miami, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Genus PLC, ABS Global, Deforest, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene regulatory networks are complex dynamic systems and the 
reverse-engineering of such networks from high-dimensional time course 
transcriptomic data have attracted researchers from various fields. It is also 
interesting and important to study the behavior of the reconstructed networks on 
the basis of dynamic models and the biological mechanisms. We focus on the gene 
regulatory networks reconstructed using the ordinary differential equation (ODE) 
modelling approach and investigate the properties of these networks.
RESULTS: Controllability and stability analyses are conducted for the 
reconstructed gene response networks of 17 influenza infected subjects based on 
ODE models. Symptomatic subjects tend to have larger numbers of driver nodes, 
higher proportions of critical links and lower proportions of redundant links 
than asymptomatic subjects. We also show that the degree distribution, rather 
than the structure of networks, plays an important role in controlling the 
network in response to influenza infection. In addition, we find that the 
stability of high-dimensional networks is very sensitive to randomness in the 
reconstructed systems brought by errors in measurements and parameter 
estimation.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene response networks of asymptomatic subjects are easier to 
be controlled than those of symptomatic subjects. This may indicate that the 
regulatory systems of asymptomatic subjects are easier to recover from disease 
stimulations, so these subjects are less likely to develop symptoms. Our results 
also suggest that stability constraint should be considered in the modelling of 
high-dimensional networks and the estimation of network parameters.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idm.2016.07.002
PMCID: PMC5963324
PMID: 29928721


158. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2024 Feb;51(1):91. doi: 10.1007/s10928-023-09879-3.

Correction to: Classical structural identifiability methodology applied to 
low-dimensional dynamic systems in receptor theory.

White C(1), Rottschäfer V(2)(3), Bridge L(4).

Author information:
(1)Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(2)Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)University of the West of England, Bristol, UK. lloyd.bridge@uwe.ac.uk.

Erratum for
    J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2024 Feb;51(1):39-63. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-023-09870-y.

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-023-09879-3
PMCID: PMC10884089
PMID: 37495832


159. Entropy (Basel). 2021 Dec 2;23(12):1625. doi: 10.3390/e23121625.

Disturbance-Observer-Based U-Control (DOBUC) for Nonlinear Dynamic Systems.

Li R(1), Zhu Q(1), Yang J(2), Narayan P(1), Yue X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering Design and Mathematics, University of the West of 
England, Frenchay Campus, Coldharbour Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK.
(2)Department of Aeronautical and Automotive Engineering, Loughborough 
University, Leicestershire LE11 3TU, UK.

U-model, which is a control-oriented model set with the property of generally 
facilitate nonlinearity dynamic inversion/cancellation, has been introduced to 
the Disturbance Observer-Based control (DOBC) methods to improve the performance 
of the nonlinear systems in this paper. A general DOB based U-Control (DOBUC) 
framework is proposed to improve the disturbance attenuation capability of 
U-controller for both linear and nonlinear systems combined with (based on) the 
U-model-based dynamic inversion which expands the classical linear disturbance 
observer control to general nonlinear systems. The proposed two-step DOBUC 
design procedures in which the design of DOB and U-controller are totally 
independent and separated, enables the establishment of global exponential 
stability without being subject to disturbances and uncertainties. Comparative 
simulation experiments with Nonlinear DOBC in controlling Wind Energy Conversion 
Systems (WECS) and Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motors (PMSM) demonstrated the 
proposed method.

DOI: 10.3390/e23121625
PMCID: PMC8699937
PMID: 34945931

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


160. Health Educ Behav. 2013 Oct;40(1 Suppl):111S-22S. doi: 10.1177/1090198113490723.

Multilevel dynamic systems affecting introduction of HIV/STI prevention 
innovations among Chinese women in sex work establishments.

Weeks MR(1), Li J, Liao S, Zhang Q, Dunn J, Wang Y, Jiang J.

Author information:
(1)1Institute for Community Research, Hartford, CT, USA.

Social and public health scientists are increasingly interested in applying 
system dynamics theory to improve understanding and to harness the forces of 
change within complex, multilevel systems that affect community intervention 
implementation, effects, and sustainability. Building a system dynamics model 
based on ethnographic case study has the advantage of using empirically 
documented contextual factors and processes of change in a real-world and 
real-time setting that can then be tested in the same and other settings. System 
dynamics modeling offers great promise for addressing persistent problems like 
HIV and other sexually transmitted epidemics, particularly in complex rapidly 
developing countries such as China. We generated a system dynamics model of a 
multilevel intervention we conducted to promote female condoms for HIV/sexually 
transmitted infection (STI) prevention among Chinese women in sex work 
establishments. The model reflects factors and forces affecting the study's 
intervention, implementation, and effects. To build this conceptual model, we 
drew on our experiences and findings from this intensive, longitudinal 
mixed-ethnographic and quantitative four-town comparative case study (2007-2012) 
of the sex work establishments, the intervention conducted in them, and factors 
likely to explain variation in process and outcomes in the four towns. Multiple 
feedback loops in the sex work establishments, women's social networks, and the 
health organization responsible for implementing HIV/STI interventions in each 
town and at the town level directly or indirectly influenced the female condom 
intervention. We present the conceptual system dynamics model and discuss how 
further testing in this and other settings can inform future community 
interventions to reduce HIV and STIs.

DOI: 10.1177/1090198113490723
PMCID: PMC4360974
PMID: 24084394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Sensors (Basel). 2020 Dec 29;21(1):181. doi: 10.3390/s21010181.

Educational Mechatronics and Internet of Things: A Case Study on Dynamic Systems 
Using MEIoT Weather Station.

Carlos-Mancilla MA(1), Luque-Vega LF(1), Guerrero-Osuna HA(2), Ornelas-Vargas 
G(2), Aguilar-Molina Y(3), González-Jiménez LE(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación, Innovación y Desarrollo Tecnológico CIIDETEC-UVM, 
Universidad del Valle de México, Tlaquepaque 45601, Mexico.
(2)Unidad Académica de Ingeniería Eléctrica, Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, 
Zacatecas 98000, Mexico.
(3)Centro Universitario de los Valles, Universidad de Guadalajara, Ameca 46600, 
Mexico.
(4)Department of Electronics Systems and Computing, ITESO AC, Tlaquepaque 45604, 
Mexico.

This paper presents the design and development of an IoT device, called MEIoT 
weather station, which combines the Educational Mechatronics and IoT to develop 
the required knowledge and skills for Industry 4.0. MEIoT weather station 
connects to the internet, measures eight weather variables, and upload the 
sensed data to the cloud. The MEIoT weather station is the first device working 
with the IoT architecture of the National Digital Observatory of Intelligent 
Environments. In addition, an IoT open platform, GUI-MEIoT, serves as a graphic 
user interface. GUI-MEIoT is used to visualize the real-time data of the weather 
variables, it also shows the historical data collected, and allows to export 
them to a csv file. Finally, an OBNiSE architecture application to Engineering 
Education is presented with a dynamic system case of study that includes the 
instructional design carried out within the Educational Mechatronics Conceptual 
Framework (EMCF) to show the relevance of this proposal. This work main 
contribution to the state of art is the design and integration of the OBNiSE 
architecture within the EMCF offering the possibility to add more IoT devices 
for several smart domains such as smart campus, smart cities, smart people and 
smart industries.

DOI: 10.3390/s21010181
PMCID: PMC7795622
PMID: 33383917

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


162. Am J Hum Biol. 2025 Oct;37(10):e70157. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.70157.

Embedding Multilevel and Dynamic Systems Approaches in Anthropological Causal 
Inference: Commentary on Watson et al. (2025).

Rattanapitoon SK(1), La N(2), Eaksanti T(3), Rattanapitoon NK(1).

Author information:
(1)FMC Medical Center, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Pediatrics and Medicine, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(3)Faculty of Public Health, Nakhon Ratchasima Rajabhat University, Nakhon 
Ratchasima, Thailand.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.70157
PMID: 41064937


163. Biom J. 2016 May;58(3):691-714. doi: 10.1002/bimj.201500082. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Inference in dynamic systems using B-splines and quasilinearized ODE penalties.

Frasso G(1), Jaeger J(2), Lambert P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculté des Sciences Sociales, Méthodes Quantitatives en Sciences Sociales, 
Université de Liège, Boulevard du Rectorat 7, B-4000, Liège, Belgium.
(2)Nestlé Research Center, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Institut de Statistique, Biostatistique et Sciences Actuarielles, Université 
Catholique de Louvain, Belgium.

Nonlinear (systems of) ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are common tools 
in the analysis of complex one-dimensional dynamic systems. We propose a 
smoothing approach regularized by a quasilinearized ODE-based penalty. Within 
the quasilinearized spline-based framework, the estimation reduces to a 
conditionally linear problem for the optimization of the spline coefficients. 
Furthermore, standard ODE compliance parameter(s) selection criteria are 
applicable. We evaluate the performances of the proposed strategy through 
simulated and real data examples. Simulation studies suggest that the proposed 
procedure ensures more accurate estimates than standard nonlinear least squares 
approaches when the state (initial and/or boundary) conditions are not known.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/bimj.201500082
PMID: 26602190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Dev Psychopathol. 2003 Summer;15(3):641-69. doi: 10.1017/s0954579403000324.

Dynamic systems methods for models of developmental psychopathology.

Granic I(1), Hollenstein T.

Author information:
(1)University of Oregon, Child and Family Center, USA. 
isabela.granic@sickkids.ca

A survey of dynamic systems (DS) methods appropriate for testing systems-based 
models in developmental psychopathology is provided. The rationale for 
developing new methods for the field is reviewed first. In line with other 
scholars, we highlight the fundamental incompatibility between 
developmentalists' organismic, open systems models and the mechanistic research 
methods with which these models are tested. Key DS principles are explained and 
their commensurability with developmental psychopathologists' core theoretical 
concerns are discussed. Next, a survey of research designs and methodological 
techniques currently being used and refined by developmental DS researchers is 
provided. The strengths and limitations of each approach are discussed 
throughout this review. Finally, we elaborate on one specific dynamic systems 
method, state space grids, which addresses many of the limitations of previous 
DS techniques and may prove most useful for the discipline. This approach was 
developed as a middle road between DS methods that are mathematically heavy on 
the one hand and purely descriptive on the other. Examples of developmental and 
clinical studies that have applied state space grids are reviewed and 
suggestions for future analyses are made. We conclude with some implications for 
the application of this new methodology for studying change processes in 
clinical research.

DOI: 10.1017/s0954579403000324
PMID: 14582935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Front Psychol. 2017 Nov 29;8:2032. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02032. eCollection 
2017.

Approaches to Cognitive Modeling in Dynamic Systems Control.

Holt DV(1), Osman M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Biological and Experimental Psychology, School of Biological 
and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.

Much of human decision making occurs in dynamic situations where decision makers 
have to control a number of interrelated elements (dynamic systems control). 
Although in recent years progress has been made toward assessing individual 
differences in control performance, the cognitive processes underlying 
exploration and control of dynamic systems are not yet well understood. In this 
perspectives article we examine the contribution of different approaches to 
modeling cognition in dynamic systems control, including instance-based 
learning, heuristic models, complex knowledge-based models and models of causal 
learning. We conclude that each approach has particular strengths in modeling 
certain aspects of cognition in dynamic systems control. In particular, Bayesian 
models of causal learning and hybrid models combining heuristic strategies with 
reinforcement learning appear to be promising avenues for further work in this 
field.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02032
PMCID: PMC5712578
PMID: 29238315


166. Br J Health Psychol. 2019 Feb;24(1):192-214. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12347. Epub 2018 
Nov 29.

Use of dynamic systems methods to characterize dyadic interactions in smoking 
cessation behavioural support sessions: A feasibility study.

Gainforth HL(1), Lorencatto F(2), Erickson K(3), Baxter K(1), Owens K(1), Michie 
S(2), West R(2).

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)University College London, UK.
(3)Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND: Understanding how behaviour change techniques (BCTs) operate in 
practice requires a method for characterizing the reciprocal, dynamic, and 
real-time nature of behavioural support interactions between practitioners and 
clients. State space grids (SSGs) are an observational, dynamic systems 
methodology used to map the trajectory of dyadic interactions in real time. By 
mapping the flow of events in terms of practitioner and client actions, SSGs are 
potentially well suited to characterize behavioural support sessions.
PURPOSE: To develop reliable methods and examine the feasibility of using the 
SSG methodology for characterizing practitioners' delivery of and clients' 
response to BCTs in smoking cessation behavioural support sessions.
METHODS: Smoking cessation behavioural support sessions were video-recorded and 
transcribed verbatim (n = 6 recordings; 2,916 statements). All speech was coded 
independently by two researchers for content and duration using published 
frameworks for specifying practitioner-delivered and client-received BCTs in 
smoking cessation interactions. Inter-rater reliability was assessed. Indices of 
practitioner-client interaction dynamics were derived: (1) reciprocity (i.e., 
attractor states, content congruence, conditional pairing) and (2) temporal 
patterning (i.e., variability, inter-grid distance, combinatory 
micro-patterning, sessional macropatterning). The extent to which indices can 
describe differences between sessions involving different practitioners and 
clients was examined.
RESULTS: Inter-rater reliability was moderate at 72% agreement. Indices of 
reciprocity and temporal patterning characterized differences between sessions 
involving different practitioners and clients.
CONCLUSIONS: State space grids provide a method for characterizing the 
complexity and variability of practitioner-delivered and client-received BCTs in 
behavioural support sessions. This method has potential to add explanatory value 
to smoking cessation intervention outcomes. Statement of Contribution What is 
already known on this subject? Frameworks exist for characterizing 
practitioner-delivered and client-received behaviour change techniques (BCTs). 
Methods are still needed to investigate which BCTs are effective under what 
conditions. State space grids (SSGs) are a dynamic systems method that may 
better characterize behavioural support interactions. What does this study add? 
First reliable, dynamic systems, SSG coding procedures, methods, and measures to 
characterize behavioural support. A method for examining reciprocality and 
temporal patterning of BCT delivery and receipt. Establishes a dynamic systems 
method that adds explanatory value to the outcomes of interventions.

© 2018 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bjhp.12347
PMID: 30489001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Front Syst Neurosci. 2017 Mar 14;11:10. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2017.00010. 
eCollection 2017.

Cinematic Operation of the Cerebral Cortex Interpreted via Critical Transitions 
in Self-Organized Dynamic Systems.

Kozma R(1), Freeman WJ(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of 
MassachusettsAmherst, MA, USA; Department of Mathematical Sciences, University 
of MemphisMemphis, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at 
Berkeley Berkeley, CA, USA.

Measurements of local field potentials over the cortical surface and the scalp 
of animals and human subjects reveal intermittent bursts of beta and gamma 
oscillations. During the bursts, narrow-band metastable amplitude modulation 
(AM) patters emerge for a fraction of a second and ultimately dissolve to the 
broad-band random background activity. The burst process depends on previously 
learnt conditioned stimuli (CS), thus different AM patterns may emerge in 
response to different CS. This observation leads to our cinematic theory of 
cognition when perception happens in discrete steps manifested in the sequence 
of AM patterns. Our article summarizes findings in the past decades on 
experimental evidence of cinematic theory of cognition and relevant mathematical 
models. We treat cortices as dissipative systems that self-organize themselves 
near a critical level of activity that is a non-equilibrium metastable state. 
Criticality is arguably a key aspect of brains in their rapid adaptation, 
reconfiguration, high storage capacity, and sensitive response to external 
stimuli. Self-organized criticality (SOC) became an important concept to 
describe neural systems. We argue that transitions from one AM pattern to the 
other require the concept of phase transitions, extending beyond the dynamics 
described by SOC. We employ random graph theory (RGT) and percolation dynamics 
as fundamental mathematical approaches to model fluctuations in the cortical 
tissue. Our results indicate that perceptions are formed through a phase 
transition from a disorganized (high entropy) to a well-organized (low entropy) 
state, which explains the swiftness of the emergence of the perceptual 
experience in response to learned stimuli.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2017.00010
PMCID: PMC5348494
PMID: 28352218


168. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 May 14;(18):2529-31. doi: 10.1039/b901899a. Epub 2009 
Mar 23.

Constitutional dynamic systems of ionic and molecular liquids.

Soutullo MD(1), O'Brien RA, Gaines KE, Davis JH Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Alabama, Mobile, 36688, USA.

The ionic liquids N-methylpyridinium-2-carboxaldehyde Tf(2)N(-) and 
N-methylpyridinium-3-carboxaldehyde Tf(2)N(-) form readily-reversible covalent 
bonds with protic nucleophiles, creating all-liquid constitutionally dynamic 
materials.

DOI: 10.1039/b901899a
PMID: 19532879


169. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Mar 13:2025.03.11.642143. doi: 
10.1101/2025.03.11.642143.

Yeast aging from a dynamic systems perspective: Analysis of single cell 
trajectories reveals significant interplay between nuclear size scaling, 
proteasome dynamics, and mitochondrial morphology.

Mobaraki M(1)(2), Deng C(1), Zheng J(1), Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Developmental Stem Cell Biology Program, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Yeast replicative aging is cell autonomous and thus a good model for mechanistic 
study from a dynamic systems perspective. Utilizing an engineered strain of 
yeast with a switchable genetic program to arrest daughter cells (without 
affecting mother cell divisions) and a high throughput microfluidic device, we 
systematically analyze the dynamic trajectories of thousands of single yeast 
mother cells throughout their lifespan, using fluorescent reporters that cover a 
range of biological processes, including some major aging hallmarks. We found 
that the markers of proteostasis stand out as most predictive of the lifespan of 
individual cells. In particular, nuclear proteasome concentration at middle age 
is a good predictor. We found that cell size (measured by area) grows linearly 
with time, and that nuclear size grows in proportion to maintain isometric 
scaling in young cells. As the cells become older, their nuclear size increases 
faster than linear and isometric size scaling breaks down. We observed that 
proteasome concentration in the nucleus exhibits dynamics very different from 
that in cytoplasm, with much more rapid decrease during aging; such dynamic 
behavior can be accounted for by the change of nuclear size in a simple 
mathematical model of transport. We hypothesize that the gradual increase of 
cell size and the associated nuclear size increase lead to the dilution of 
important nuclear factors (such as proteasome) that drives aging. We also show 
that perturbing proteasome changes mitochondria morphology and function, but not 
vice versa, potentially placing the change of proteosome upstream of the change 
of mitochondrial phenotypes. Our study produced large scale single cell dynamic 
data that can serve as a valuable resource for the aging research community to 
analyze the dynamics of other markers and potential causal relations between 
them. It is also a useful resource for building and testing physics/AI based 
models that identify early dynamics events predictive of lifespan and can be 
targets for longevity interventions.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.03.11.642143
PMCID: PMC11952390
PMID: 40161634


170. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e110261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110261. 
eCollection 2014.

On finding and using identifiable parameter combinations in nonlinear dynamic 
systems biology models and COMBOS: a novel web implementation.

Meshkat N(1), Kuo CE(1), DiStefano J 3rd(1).

Author information:
(1)Biocybernetics Laboratory, Departments of Computer Science and Medicine and 
Computational and Systems Biology Interdepartmental Program, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Parameter identifiability problems can plague biomodelers when they reach the 
quantification stage of development, even for relatively simple models. 
Structural identifiability (SI) is the primary question, usually understood as 
knowing which of P unknown biomodel parameters p1,…, pi,…, pP are-and which are 
not-quantifiable in principle from particular input-output (I-O) biodata. It is 
not widely appreciated that the same database also can provide quantitative 
information about the structurally unidentifiable (not quantifiable) subset, in 
the form of explicit algebraic relationships among unidentifiable pi. 
Importantly, this is a first step toward finding what else is needed to quantify 
particular unidentifiable parameters of interest from new I-O experiments. We 
further develop, implement and exemplify novel algorithms that address and solve 
the SI problem for a practical class of ordinary differential equation (ODE) 
systems biology models, as a user-friendly and universally-accessible web 
application (app)-COMBOS. Users provide the structural ODE and output 
measurement models in one of two standard forms to a remote server via their web 
browser. COMBOS provides a list of uniquely and non-uniquely SI model 
parameters, and-importantly-the combinations of parameters not individually SI. 
If non-uniquely SI, it also provides the maximum number of different solutions, 
with important practical implications. The behind-the-scenes symbolic 
differential algebra algorithms are based on computing Gröbner bases of model 
attributes established after some algebraic transformations, using the 
computer-algebra system Maxima. COMBOS was developed for facile instructional 
and research use as well as modeling. We use it in the classroom to illustrate 
SI analysis; and have simplified complex models of tumor suppressor p53 and 
hormone regulation, based on explicit computation of parameter combinations. 
It's illustrated and validated here for models of moderate complexity, with and 
without initial conditions. Built-in examples include unidentifiable 2 to 
4-compartment and HIV dynamics models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110261
PMCID: PMC4211654
PMID: 25350289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


171. Neuroimage. 2010 Sep;52(3):1027-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.081. Epub 
2009 Dec 5.

Identification and validation of effective connectivity networks in functional 
magnetic resonance imaging using switching linear dynamic systems.

Smith JF(1), Pillai A, Chen K, Horwitz B.

Author information:
(1)Brain Imaging and Modeling Section, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1407, 
USA. smithja@nidcd.nih.gov

Dynamic connectivity networks identify directed interregional interactions 
between modeled brain regions in neuroimaging. However, problems arise when the 
regions involved in a task and their interconnections are not fully known a 
priori. Objective measures of model adequacy are necessary to validate such 
models. We present a connectivity formalism, the Switching Linear Dynamic System 
(SLDS), that is capable of identifying both Granger-Geweke and instantaneous 
connectivity that vary according to experimental conditions. SLDS explicitly 
models the task condition as a Markov random variable. The series of task 
conditions can be estimated from new data given an identified model providing a 
means to validate connectivity patterns. We use SLDS to model functional 
magnetic resonance imaging data from five regions during a finger alternation 
task. Using interregional connectivity alone, the identified model predicted the 
task condition vector from a different subject with a different task ordering 
with high accuracy. In addition, important regions excluded from a model can be 
identified by augmenting the model state space. A motor task model excluding 
primary motor cortices was augmented with a new neural state constrained by its 
connectivity with the included regions. The augmented variable time series, 
convolved with a hemodynamic kernel, was compared to all brain voxels. The right 
primary motor cortex was identified as the best region to add to the model. Our 
results suggest that the SLDS model framework is an effective means to address 
several problems with modeling connectivity including measuring overall model 
adequacy and identifying important regions missing from models.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.081
PMCID: PMC3503253
PMID: 19969092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. ISA Trans. 2010 Oct;49(4):528-34. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2010.02.003. Epub 2010 
May 26.

Uncertainty modeling and predicting the probability of stability and performance 
in the manufacture of dynamic systems.

Fales R(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 3415 Lafferre 
Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. falser@missouri.edu

In this work, a method for determining the reliability of dynamic systems is 
discussed. Using statistical information on system parameters, the goal is to 
determine the probability of a dynamic system achieving or not achieving 
frequency domain performance specifications such as low frequency tracking 
error, and bandwidth. An example system is considered with closed loop control. 
A performance specification is given and converted into a performance weight 
transfer function. The example system is found to have a 20% chance of not 
achieving the given performance specification. An example of a realistic higher 
order system model of an electro hydraulic valve with spring feedback and 
position measurement feedback is also considered. The spring rate and viscous 
friction are considered as random variables with normal distributions. It was 
found that nearly 6% of valve systems would not achieve the given frequency 
domain performance requirement. Uncertainty modeling is also considered. An 
uncertainty model for the hydraulic valve systems is presented with the same 
uncertain parameters as in the previous example. However, the uncertainty model 
was designed such that only 95% of plants would be covered by the uncertainty 
model. This uncertainty model was applied to the valve control system example in 
a robust performance test.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2010.02.003
PMID: 20510413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2017 Sep;28(9):2196-2208. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2016.2581141. Epub 2016 Jun 24.

Methodology of Recurrent Laguerre-Volterra Network for Modeling Nonlinear 
Dynamic Systems.

Geng K, Marmarelis VZ.

In this paper, we have introduced a general modeling approach for dynamic 
nonlinear systems that utilizes a variant of the simulated annealing algorithm 
for training the Laguerre-Volterra network (LVN) to overcome the local minima 
and convergence problems and employs a pruning technique to achieve sparse LVN 
representations with l1 regularization. We tested this new approach with 
computer simulated systems and extended it to autoregressive sparse LVN (ASLVN) 
model structures that are suitable for input-output modeling of nonlinear 
systems that exhibit transitions in dynamic states, such as the Hodgkin-Huxley 
(H-H) equations of neuronal firing. Application of the proposed ASLVN to the H-H 
equations yields a more parsimonious input-output model with improved predictive 
capability that is amenable to more insightful physiological/biological 
interpretation.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2016.2581141
PMCID: PMC5596897
PMID: 27352401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nature. 2010 Aug 26;466(7310):1102-4. doi: 10.1038/nature09319. Epub 2010 Aug 
11.

Statistical inference for noisy nonlinear ecological dynamic systems.

Wood SN(1).

Author information:
(1)Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. 
s.wood@bath.ac.uk

Chaotic ecological dynamic systems defy conventional statistical analysis. 
Systems with near-chaotic dynamics are little better. Such systems are almost 
invariably driven by endogenous dynamic processes plus demographic and 
environmental process noise, and are only observable with error. Their 
sensitivity to history means that minute changes in the driving noise 
realization, or the system parameters, will cause drastic changes in the system 
trajectory. This sensitivity is inherited and amplified by the joint probability 
density of the observable data and the process noise, rendering it useless as 
the basis for obtaining measures of statistical fit. Because the joint density 
is the basis for the fit measures used by all conventional statistical methods, 
this is a major theoretical shortcoming. The inability to make well-founded 
statistical inferences about biological dynamic models in the chaotic and 
near-chaotic regimes, other than on an ad hoc basis, leaves dynamic theory 
without the methods of quantitative validation that are essential tools in the 
rest of biological science. Here I show that this impasse can be resolved in a 
simple and general manner, using a method that requires only the ability to 
simulate the observed data on a system from the dynamic model about which 
inferences are required. The raw data series are reduced to phase-insensitive 
summary statistics, quantifying local dynamic structure and the distribution of 
observations. Simulation is used to obtain the mean and the covariance matrix of 
the statistics, given model parameters, allowing the construction of a 
'synthetic likelihood' that assesses model fit. This likelihood can be explored 
using a straightforward Markov chain Monte Carlo sampler, but one further 
post-processing step returns pure likelihood-based inference. I apply the method 
to establish the dynamic nature of the fluctuations in Nicholson's classic 
blowfly experiments.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09319
PMID: 20703226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Child Dev. 2000 Jan-Feb;71(1):36-43. doi: 10.1111/1467-8624.00116.

The promise of dynamic systems approaches for an integrated account of human 
development.

Lewis MD(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, OISE/UT, ON, Canada. mlewis@oise.utoronto.ca

After decades of theoretical fragmentation and insularity, a converging 
explanatory framework based on general scientific principles is an important 
goal for developmental psychology. Dynamic systems approaches may provide such a 
framework, using principles of self-organization to explain how novel forms 
emerge without predetermination and become increasingly complex with 
development. New trends in traditional theoretical families emphasize systemic, 
emergent processes, and these can now be explicated with principles of 
self-organization that apply to all natural systems. Self-organization thus 
provides a single explanation for the multiple facets of development, 
integrating diverse developmental viewpoints within a larger scientific 
perspective.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-8624.00116
PMID: 10836556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 7;13(1):3817. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-30704-x.

Novel methods for reliability study of multi-dimensional non-linear dynamic 
systems.

Gaidai O(1), Xu J(2), Yan P(1), Xing Y(3), Wang K(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China. jxxu@shou.edu.cn.
(3)University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.

This research presents two unique techniques for engineering system reliability 
analysis of multi-dimensional non-linear dynamic structures. First, the 
structural reliability technique works best for multi-dimensional structural 
responses that have been either numerically simulated or measured over a long 
enough length to produce an ergodic time series. Second, a novel extreme value 
prediction method that can be used in various engineering applications is 
proposed. In contrast to those currently used in engineering reliability 
methodologies, the novel method is easy to use, and even a limited amount of 
data can still be used to obtain robust system failure estimates. As 
demonstrated in this work, proposed methods also provide accurate confidence 
bands for system failure levels in the case of real-life measured structural 
response. Additionally, traditional reliability approaches that deal with time 
series do not have the benefit of being able to handle a system's high 
dimensionality and cross-correlation across several dimensions readily. 
Container ship that experiences significant deck panel pressures and high roll 
angles when travelling in bad weather was selected as the example for this 
study. The main concern for ship transportation is the potential loss of cargo 
owing to violent movements. Simulating such a situation is difficult since waves 
and ship motions are non-stationary and complicatedly non-linear. Extreme 
movements greatly enhance the role of nonlinearities, activating effects of 
second and higher order. Furthermore, laboratory testing may also be called into 
doubt due to the scale and the choice of the sea state. Therefore, data 
collected from actual ships during difficult weather journeys offer a unique 
perspective on the statistics of ship movements. This work aims to benchmark 
state-of-the-art methods, making it possible to extract necessary information 
about the extreme response from available on-board measured time histories. Both 
suggested methods can be used in combination, making them attractive and ready 
to use for engineers. Methods proposed in this paper open up possibilities to 
predict simply yet efficiently system failure probability for non-linear 
multi-dimensional dynamic structure.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-30704-x
PMCID: PMC9992667
PMID: 36882439

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


177. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2002 Jun;30(3):265-83. doi: 10.1023/a:1015106913866.

Combining dynamic systems and multivariate analyses to compare the mother-child 
interactions of externalizing subtypes.

Granic I(1), Lamey AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Child and Family Center, University of Oregon, 
Eugene 97401-3408, USA. igranic@darkwing.uoregon.edu

A dynamic systems analysis was conducted to distinguish the parent-child 
interactions of "pure" externalizing children from children comorbid for 
externalizing and internalizing problems. Thirty-three parents and clinically 
referred children (8-12 years old) discussed a problem for 4 min and then tried 
to "wrap up" in response to a signal (a perturbation). The perturbation was 
intended to increase the pressure on the dyad, triggering a reorganization of 
their behavioral system. We hypothesized that the comorbid group would be 
distinguished from the externalizing-only group as a result of this 
reorganization, but not before. The sequential data were analyzed using a 
combination of case-sensitive (state space grids and chi-square analyses) and 
group-based, multivariate techniques (log-linear modeling). Results revealed 
that externalizing dyads engaged in a permissive pattern throughout the 
problem-solving session, whereas comorbid dyads shifted from a permissive 
pattern to a mutually hostile pattern after the perturbation. These findings 
punctuate the need for a dynamic systems approach to the study of relationship 
processes associated with the development of childhood psychopathology. 
Theoretical and clinical implications are discussed.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1015106913866
PMID: 12041712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Rev Bras Fisioter. 2010 Nov-Dec;14(6):446-63.

A dynamic systems/constraints approach to rehabilitation.

Holt KG(1), Wagenaar RO, Saltzman E.

Author information:
(1)Sargent College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Department of 
Rehabilitation Science, Boston University, Boston, USA. kgholt@bu.edu

BACKGROUND: Classification systems (Nagi, International Classification for 
Function [ICF]) have become popular for categorizing the level of ability (ICF) 
or disability (Nagi) associated with movement disorders. Nevertheless, these 
classifications do not explore the ways in which one level may influence other 
levels. For example, how might the weakness and stiffness associated with some 
cases of cerebral palsy result in a stereotypical toe-gait? In this overview we 
describe a dynamic systems/constraints (DS/C) approach to understand 
relationships between levels, and how the approach can be used to rationalize a 
novel process for the evaluation and treatment of movement disorders.
OBJECTIVES: There are three specific aims in this paper: first to present a 
general systems approach to understanding behavior at different levels; second 
to present tools of, and the results of empirical work using the DS/C approach; 
third to discuss the clinical implications and results of clinical interventions 
motivated by DS/C analysis for children with cerebral palsy, and individuals 
with Parkinson disease.

PMID: 21340238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Neural Syst. 2013 Dec;23(6):1350025. doi: 10.1142/S0129065713500251. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

A gray-box neural network-based model identification and fault estimation scheme 
for nonlinear dynamic systems.

Cen Z(1), Wei J, Jiang R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

A novel gray-box neural network model (GBNNM), including multi-layer perception 
(MLP) neural network (NN) and integrators, is proposed for a model 
identification and fault estimation (MIFE) scheme. With the GBNNM, both the 
nonlinearity and dynamics of a class of nonlinear dynamic systems can be 
approximated. Unlike previous NN-based model identification methods, the GBNNM 
directly inherits system dynamics and separately models system nonlinearities. 
This model corresponds well with the object system and is easy to build. The 
GBNNM is embedded online as a normal model reference to obtain the quantitative 
residual between the object system output and the GBNNM output. This residual 
can accurately indicate the fault offset value, so it is suitable for differing 
fault severities. To further estimate the fault parameters (FPs), an improved 
extended state observer (ESO) using the same NNs (IESONN) from the GBNNM is 
proposed to avoid requiring the knowledge of ESO nonlinearity. Then, the 
proposed MIFE scheme is applied for reaction wheels (RW) in a satellite attitude 
control system (SACS). The scheme using the GBNNM is compared with other NNs in 
the same fault scenario, and several partial loss of effect (LOE) faults with 
different severities are considered to validate the effectiveness of the FP 
estimation and its superiority.

DOI: 10.1142/S0129065713500251
PMID: 24156668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. ISA Trans. 2022 Oct;129(Pt B):171-191. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.02.016. Epub 
2022 Feb 15.

Optimal control for multistage uncertain random dynamic systems with multiple 
time delays.

Chen X(1), Zhu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Nanjing University of Science and 
Technology, Nanjing 210094, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: 
xchen@njust.edu.cn.
(2)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Nanjing University of Science and 
Technology, Nanjing 210094, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: 
ygzhu@njust.edu.cn.

A complex system exhibiting uncertainty as well as randomness is an uncertain 
random dynamic system. A novel idea of an uncertain random matrix is introduced 
as an interaction between uncertainty and randomness. Thereby a time-delayed 
uncertain random dynamic system is formulated. And then the corresponding 
time-delayed optimal control problem is first presented in this paper. To tackle 
a problem like that, a method is proposed to translate it into an equivalent 
optimization problem without time delay. The relevant recursion equations are 
developed with the dynamic programming technique to solve the converted 
optimization problem. Solving the related recursion equations yields the answer 
to such an optimization problem. The presented approach offers a unified 
framework for tackling the discrete-time uncertain random optimal control 
problem involving time delays. In this framework, three algorithms are 
successfully devised in doing with time-delayed optimal control problems for 
dynamic systems regarding linear, quadratic, and cubic controls. Meanwhile, the 
optimal solutions for numerical examples are found by the raised algorithms. 
Finally, a problem of optimal control for a two-spool turbofan engine is 
investigated as an application of our results.

Copyright © 2022 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2022.02.016
PMID: 35219455

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


181. Int J Neurosci. 2000 Sep-Oct;104(1-4):29-47. doi: 10.3109/00207450009035007.

Dynamic systems theory approach to consciousness.

Bielecki A(1), Kokoszka A, Holas P.

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland. 
kokoszka@psych.waw.pl

The review of the main existing approaches to consciousness in the literature 
indicates that consciousness is multileveled and that humans have an ability to 
experience a wide range of its various states. The common views of the main 
approaches to consciousness are identified and considered in a three-dimensional 
model of states of consciousness developed by Kokoszka. This model is then 
described and discussed using a mathematical terms of dynamic systems theory. 
Since mathematics is an accepted tool for the description of the physical world, 
the congruence of psychological and mathematical models is understood as a 
meaningful support to the psychological one. Connections of the models with 
artificial neural networks and some applications in psychology are considered.

DOI: 10.3109/00207450009035007
PMID: 11011972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dalton Trans. 2022 Dec 20;52(1):90-96. doi: 10.1039/d2dt02955c.

Metal-directed self-assembly of constitutionally dynamic systems: control of the 
nuclearity of Pd(II)/Pt(II) metallacycles.

Neira I(1), Domarco O(1), Rama T(1), Blanco V(2), Peinador C(1), García MD(1), 
Quintela JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química and Centro de Investigaciones Científicas Avanzadas 
(CICA), Facultad de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña, E-15071 A Coruña, Spain. 
carlos.peinador@udc.es.
(2)Departamento de Química Orgánica and Unidad de Excelencia de Química (UEQ), 
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Granada, Avda. Fuente Nueva S/N, 18071 
Granada, Spain. victorblancos@ugr.es.

Self-assembly with the square-planar Pd(II) or Pt(II) (en)M(ONO2)2 (en = 
ethylenediamine) complexes of ditopic ligands incorporating both 
N,N'-dialkyl-4,4'-bipyridinium and N-monoalkyl-4,4'-bipyridinium or 
N-monoalkyl-2,7-diazapyrenium moieties leads to constitutionally dynamic systems 
responsive to the concentration of the components. At low concentrations, the 
metallamacrocyclic mononuclear [ML]5+ species is formed. In contrast, when the 
concentration is increased, a defined dinuclear [M2L2]10+ structure appears as a 
second species in equilibrium, becoming the major one at high concentrations. 
Besides concentration changes, the addition of an aromatic guest also allows the 
control of the system speciation, shifting the outcome of the metal-directed 
self-assembly towards the mononuclear metallacycle. This dynamic behavior 
enables the control of the nuclearity of the metallacycles assembled by external 
stimuli.

DOI: 10.1039/d2dt02955c
PMID: 36458974


183. Neural Netw. 2017 Sep;93:45-56. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2017.04.013. Epub 2017 May 
5.

Hybrid neuro-heuristic methodology for simulation and control of dynamic systems 
over time interval.

Woźniak M(1), Połap D(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mathematics, Silesian University of Technology, Kaszubska 23, 
44-100 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: Marcin.Wozniak@polsl.pl.
(2)Institute of Mathematics, Silesian University of Technology, Kaszubska 23, 
44-100 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: Dawid.Polap@polsl.pl.

Simulation and positioning are very important aspects of computer aided 
engineering. To process these two, we can apply traditional methods or 
intelligent techniques. The difference between them is in the way they process 
information. In the first case, to simulate an object in a particular state of 
action, we need to perform an entire process to read values of parameters. It is 
not very convenient for objects for which simulation takes a long time, i.e. 
when mathematical calculations are complicated. In the second case, an 
intelligent solution can efficiently help on devoted way of simulation, which 
enables us to simulate the object only in a situation that is necessary for a 
development process. We would like to present research results on developed 
intelligent simulation and control model of electric drive engine vehicle. For a 
dedicated simulation method based on intelligent computation, where evolutionary 
strategy is simulating the states of the dynamic model, an intelligent system 
based on devoted neural network is introduced to control co-working modules 
while motion is in time interval. Presented experimental results show 
implemented solution in situation when a vehicle transports things over area 
with many obstacles, what provokes sudden changes in stability that may lead to 
destruction of load. Therefore, applied neural network controller prevents the 
load from destruction by positioning characteristics like pressure, 
acceleration, and stiffness voltage to absorb the adverse changes of the ground.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2017.04.013
PMID: 28544890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. ISA Trans. 2024 Sep;152:217-228. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.06.014. Epub 2024 
Jun 28.

Systematic solution for multi-model control approaches in nonlinear dynamic 
systems based on the s-gap metric.

Mafi M(1), Saki S(2), Bolandi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering at Iran University of Science and 
Technology, the Islamic Republic of Iran.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering at Iran University of Science and 
Technology, the Islamic Republic of Iran. Electronic address: 
saman_saki@elec.iust.ac.ir.

This paper proposes a systematic approach for optimizing the distribution of 
local models in multi-model control systems (MMCS) to enhance overall 
robustness. While existing literature discusses this method for linear parameter 
varying (LPV) and uncertain linear time-invariant (LTI) systems, significant 
limitations persist in addressing nonlinear dynamic systems. Robust control 
tools like the gap metric and generalized stability margin (GSM) have limited 
effectiveness in analyzing the robustness of nonlinear feedback systems. To 
address these challenges, novel concepts of the gap metric and GSM are 
introduced to determine central operating points (COPs) within local operating 
areas (LOAs) across the total operating area (TOA). These COPs guide the 
extraction of affine disturbance local models (ADLMs). Additionally, an 
optimization problem based on the s-gap metric and GSM is presented to optimize 
COPs placement and LOAs boundaries. Challenges such as non-monotonic behavior of 
the cost function and complexity arising from the s-gap metric formulation 
necessitate novel solution methods. To address these, constraints are applied to 
the cost function, and a novel discrete optimization approach is introduced. 
Finally, theoretical findings are applied to the Duffing system, pH 
neutralization process, and continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) plant to 
evaluate the proposed method's effectiveness. This comprehensive validation 
across different systems underscores the versatility and practical utility of 
the proposed approach.

Copyright © 2024 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.06.014
PMID: 38955640

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


185. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2024 Dec;54(12):7224-7235. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2024.3471987. 
Epub 2024 Nov 27.

UKF-Based Optimal Tracking Control for Uncertain Dynamic Systems With Asymmetric 
Input Constraints.

Liu N, Zhang K, Xie X, Yue D.

To enhance system robustness in the face of uncertainty and achieve adaptive 
optimization of control strategies, a novel algorithm based on the unscented 
Kalman filter (UKF) is developed. This algorithm addresses the finite-horizon 
optimal tracking control problem (FHOTCP) for nonlinear discrete-time (DT) 
systems with uncertainty and asymmetric input constraints. An augmented system 
is constructed with asymmetric control constraints being considered. The 
augmented problem is addressed with a DT Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation 
(DTHJBE). By analyzing convergence with regard to the cost function and control 
law, the UKF-based iterative adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) algorithm is 
proposed. This algorithm approximates the solution of the DTHJBE, ensuring that 
the cost function converges to its optimal value within a bounded range. To 
execute the UKF-based iterative ADP algorithm, the actor-estimator-critic 
framework is built, in which the estimator refers to system state estimation 
through the application of UKF. Ultimately, simulation examples are presented to 
show the performance of the proposed method.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2024.3471987
PMID: 39401122


186. Ergonomics. 2006 Oct 10-22;49(12-13):1288-311. doi: 10.1080/00140130600612762.

Distributed situation awareness in dynamic systems: theoretical development and 
application of an ergonomics methodology.

Stanton NA(1), Stewart R, Harris D, Houghton RJ, Baber C, McMaster R, Salmon P, 
Hoyle G, Walker G, Young MS, Linsell M, Dymott R, Green D.

Author information:
(1)Human Factors Integration-Defence Technology Centre, BITlab, School of 
Engineering and Design, Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH, UK. 
Neville.Stanton@brunel.ac.uk

The purpose of this paper is to propose foundations for a theory of situation 
awareness based on the analysis of interactions between agents (i.e. both human 
and non-human) in subsystems. This approach may help to promote a better 
understanding of technology-mediated interaction in systems, as well as helping 
in the formulation of hypotheses and predictions concerning distributed 
situation awareness. It is proposed that agents within a system each hold their 
own situation awareness, which may be very different from (although compatible 
with) that of other agents. It is argued that we should not always hope for, or 
indeed want, sharing of this awareness, as different system agents have 
different purposes. This view marks situation awareness as a dynamic and 
collaborative process binding agents together on tasks on a moment-by-moment 
basis. Implications of this viewpoint for the development of a new theory of, 
and accompanying methodology for, distributed situation awareness are offered.

DOI: 10.1080/00140130600612762
PMID: 17008257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biometrics. 2011 Jun;67(2):476-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2010.01485.x. Epub 
2010 Sep 3.

Mixed-effects state-space models for analysis of longitudinal dynamic systems.

Liu D(1), Lu T, Niu XF, Wu H.

Author information:
(1)Boehringer-Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Ridgefield, Connecticut 06877, USA.

The rapid development of new biotechnologies allows us to deeply understand 
biomedical dynamic systems in more detail and at a cellular level. Many of the 
subject-specific biomedical systems can be described by a set of differential or 
difference equations that are similar to engineering dynamic systems. In this 
article, motivated by HIV dynamic studies, we propose a class of mixed-effects 
state-space models based on the longitudinal feature of dynamic systems. 
State-space models with mixed-effects components are very flexible in modeling 
the serial correlation of within-subject observations and between-subject 
variations. The Bayesian approach and the maximum likelihood method for standard 
mixed-effects models and state-space models are modified and investigated for 
estimating unknown parameters in the proposed models. In the Bayesian approach, 
full conditional distributions are derived and the Gibbs sampler is constructed 
to explore the posterior distributions. For the maximum likelihood method, we 
develop a Monte Carlo EM algorithm with a Gibbs sampler step to approximate the 
conditional expectations in the E-step. Simulation studies are conducted to 
compare the two proposed methods. We apply the mixed-effects state-space model 
to a data set from an AIDS clinical trial to illustrate the proposed 
methodologies. The proposed models and methods may also have potential 
applications in other biomedical system analyses such as tumor dynamics in 
cancer research and genetic regulatory network modeling.

© 2010, The International Biometric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2010.01485.x
PMCID: PMC3507995
PMID: 20825393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. JAMA Psychiatry. 2026 Jan 1;83(1):99-100. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2025.3147.

Path Asymmetry in Complex Dynamic Systems of Psychopathology.

Wang SB(1), Blanken TF(2), van der Maas HLJ(2), Borsboom D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.

Plain Language Summary: This article illustrates the assumption of path symmetry 
in current theories of psychopathology and calls for the development of 
dynamical systems of mental illness that incorporate asymmetry.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2025.3147
PMID: 41160033


189. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2025 Oct 14;68(10):4567-4579. doi: 
10.1044/2025_JSLHR-25-00024. Epub 2025 Sep 15.

Therapy for Childhood Apraxia of Speech Through a Dynamic Systems Lens: A 
Tutorial.

Lim J(1), McCabe P(2), Purcell A(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Healthcare Sciences, James Cook University, Townsville, 
Queensland, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)School of Health Sciences, Western Sydney University, New South Wales, 
Australia.

PURPOSE: Dynamic Systems Theory (DST) has been used as a foundational lens 
through which to observe and understand child development and disorders. 
Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a motor planning speech disorder that can 
be difficult to treat. This tutorial outlines how a DST framework can be used to 
understand the therapy process for children with CAS, thus aiding clinicians to 
provide more individualized and focused therapy for these children.
METHOD: This tutorial will focus on three concepts from DST that may have 
relevance for CAS related therapy. These are: (a) multicausality, (b) 
variability, and (c) self-organization. This tutorial will describe DST and 
demonstrate its usefulness in understanding the therapy process in children with 
CAS through a case study that outlines how the application of a dynamic systems 
framework can enhance the clinical practice of speech-language pathologists.
CONCLUSIONS: DST can be a useful theoretical framework to apply when attempting 
to understand the nature of a child's presentation of CAS. This can then be used 
to develop individualized and flexible treatment plans that help to support the 
child through developmental change.

DOI: 10.1044/2025_JSLHR-25-00024
PMID: 40952440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Front Psychol. 2018 Aug 15;9:1119. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01119. eCollection 
2018.

Fluctuation in the Assimilation of Problematic Experiences: A Case Study of 
Dynamic Systems Analysis.

Basto I(1)(2)(3), Stiles WB(4)(5), Bento T(2)(3), Pinheiro P(6), Mendes I(7), 
Rijo D(1), Salgado J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in Neuropsychology and Cognitive Behavioral Intervention 
(CINEICC), Faculty of Psychology and Education Sciences, University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)University Institute of Maia (ISMAI), Maia, Portugal.
(3)Center of Psychology at University of Porto (CPUP), University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(4)Department of Psychology, Miami University, Oxford, OH, United States.
(5)Department of Psychology, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC, United 
States.
(6)Psychology Research Center (CIPsi), School of Psychology, University of 
Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(7)Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, United Kingdom.

Dynamic systems theory suggests that instability can be a key element in the 
promotion of human change processes. Several studies have confirmed an 
association between unstable patterns and successful psychotherapeutic outcome. 
Somewhat similarly, the assimilation model of psychotherapeutic change argues 
that clinical change occurs through the integration of problematic experiences 
that initially threaten the stability of the self. This study examined how 
instability in assimilation levels was related to assimilation progress and 
change in symptom intensity, within and across sessions, in a good-outcome case 
of Emotion Focused Therapy. We used the assimilation of problematic experiences 
scales (APES) to measure assimilation and the outcome-questionnaire (OQ-10) to 
measure clinical symptom intensity. To assess assimilation instability, we used 
a fluctuation measure that calculated the amplitude and the frequency of changes 
in assimilation levels. To analyze the structural relationships between 
variables we used a dynamic factor model. The results showed that APES level and 
APES fluctuation tended to increase across treatment, while OQ-10 scores tended 
to decrease. However, contrary to expectations, the dynamic factor model showed 
no significant associations between APES fluctuation and OQ-10 scores either 
within sessions or between adjacent sessions.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01119
PMCID: PMC6104492
PMID: 30158881


191. J Trauma Stress. 2017 Aug;30(4):333-342. doi: 10.1002/jts.22208. Epub 2017 Jul 
25.

Self-Regulation Shift Theory: A Dynamic Systems Approach to Traumatic Stress.

Benight CC(1)(2), Shoji K(1), Delahanty DL(3).

Author information:
(1)Trauma, Health, and Hazards Center, University of Colorado at Colorado 
Springs, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA.
(2)Psychology Department, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, Colorado 
Springs, Colorado, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA.

Self-regulation shift theory (SRST) is a threshold theory explaining 
self-regulation following trauma that utilizes nonlinear dynamics to capture 
systemic shifts in trauma adaptation. Cusp catastrophe modeling tests nonlinear 
changes in an outcome (e.g., posttraumatic distress) based on an identified 
bifurcation factor under specific conditions (i.e., asymmetry variables). We 
evaluated two cusp models in a motor vehicle accident (MVA) database and then 
confirmed findings within a similar dataset. Based on SRST, we tested coping 
self-efficacy (CSE) as the bifurcation factor and a set of asymmetry controlling 
variables. Results demonstrated significant cusp models with CSE as a consistent 
bifurcation factor in all models. When participants reported lower peritraumatic 
dissociation, early lower CSE was a significant bifurcation factor for 3-month 
trauma symptoms in Sample 1, R2 = .18. The cusp model for changes in symptoms 
from 30 days to 3 months showed CSE as a significant bifurcation variable with 
higher levels of avoidant coping (R2 = .27). In a separate sample, early lower 
CSE was again a significant bifurcation variable with lower injury severity (R2 
= .52). Results support the importance of self-regulatory appraisals in 
nonlinear shifts in posttraumatic stress symptoms 3 months post-MVA. Theoretical 
and practical implications are discussed.

Copyright © 2017 International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies.

DOI: 10.1002/jts.22208
PMID: 28741845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2014 May;44(5):712-24. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2013.2279834. Epub 
2013 Sep 18.

Multiscale asymmetric orthogonal wavelet kernel for linear programming support 
vector learning and nonlinear dynamic systems identification.

Lu Z, Sun J, Butts K.

Support vector regression for approximating nonlinear dynamic systems is more 
delicate than the approximation of indicator functions in support vector 
classification, particularly for systems that involve multitudes of time scales 
in their sampled data. The kernel used for support vector learning determines 
the class of functions from which a support vector machine can draw its 
solution, and the choice of kernel significantly influences the performance of a 
support vector machine. In this paper, to bridge the gap between wavelet 
multiresolution analysis and kernel learning, the closed-form orthogonal wavelet 
is exploited to construct new multiscale asymmetric orthogonal wavelet kernels 
for linear programming support vector learning. The closed-form multiscale 
orthogonal wavelet kernel provides a systematic framework to implement 
multiscale kernel learning via dyadic dilations and also enables us to represent 
complex nonlinear dynamics effectively. To demonstrate the superiority of the 
proposed multiscale wavelet kernel in identifying complex nonlinear dynamic 
systems, two case studies are presented that aim at building parallel models on 
benchmark datasets. The development of parallel models that address the 
long-term/mid-term prediction issue is more intricate and challenging than the 
identification of series-parallel models where only one-step ahead prediction is 
required. Simulation results illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
multiscale kernel learning.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2013.2279834
PMID: 24058047


193. Comput Stat. 2024 Sep;39(6):3347-3372. doi: 10.1007/s00180-023-01443-4. Epub 
2023 Dec 14.

An Extended Langevinized Ensemble Kalman Filter for non-Gaussian Dynamic 
Systems.

Zhang P(1), Dong T(1), Liang F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907.

State estimation for large-scale non-Gaussian dynamic systems remains an 
unresolved issue, given nonscalability of the existing particle filter 
algorithms. To address this issue, this paper extends the Langevinized ensemble 
Kalman filter (LEnKF) algorithm to non-Gaussian dynamic systems by introducing a 
latent Gaussian measurement variable to the dynamic system. The extended LEnKF 
algorithm can converge to the right filtering distribution as the number of 
stages become large, while inheriting the scalability of the LEnKF algorithm 
with respect to the sample size and state dimension. The performance of the 
extended LEnKF algorithm is illustrated by dynamic network embedding and dynamic 
Poisson spatial models.

DOI: 10.1007/s00180-023-01443-4
PMCID: PMC11756897
PMID: 39868364


194. BMJ Open. 2024 Feb 6;14(2):e079243. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-079243.

Forecasting disease trajectories in critical illness: comparison of 
probabilistic dynamic systems to static models to predict patient status in the 
intensive care unit.

Duggal A(1), Scheraga R(2), Sacha GL(3), Wang X(4), Huang S(4), Krishnan S(2), 
Siuba MT(2), Torbic H(3), Dugar S(2), Mucha S(2), Veith J(2), Mireles-Cabodevila 
E(2), Bauer SR(3), Kethireddy S(2), Vachharajani V(2), Dalton JE(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA 
duggala2@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Critical Care, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Qualitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(5)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Conventional prediction models fail to integrate the constantly 
evolving nature of critical illness. Alternative modelling approaches to study 
dynamic changes in critical illness progression are needed. We compare static 
risk prediction models to dynamic probabilistic models in early critical 
illness.
DESIGN: We developed models to simulate disease trajectories of critically ill 
COVID-19 patients across different disease states. Eighty per cent of cases were 
randomly assigned to a training and 20% of the cases were used as a validation 
cohort. Conventional risk prediction models were developed to analyse different 
disease states for critically ill patients for the first 7 days of intensive 
care unit (ICU) stay. Daily disease state transitions were modelled using a 
series of multivariable, multinomial logistic regression models. A probabilistic 
dynamic systems modelling approach was used to predict disease trajectory over 
the first 7 days of an ICU admission. Forecast accuracy was assessed and 
simulated patient clinical trajectories were developed through our algorithm.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: We retrospectively studied patients admitted to a 
Cleveland Clinic Healthcare System in Ohio, for the treatment of COVID-19 from 
March 2020 to December 2022.
RESULTS: 5241 patients were included in the analysis. For ICU days 2-7, the 
static (conventional) modelling approach, the accuracy of the models steadily 
decreased as a function of time, with area under the curve (AUC) for each health 
state below 0.8. But the dynamic forecasting approach improved its ability to 
predict as a function of time. AUC for the dynamic forecasting approach were all 
above 0.90 for ICU days 4-7 for all states.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that modelling critical care outcomes as a dynamic 
system improved the forecasting accuracy of the disease state. Our model 
accurately identified different disease conditions and trajectories, with a <10% 
misclassification rate over the first week of critical illness.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2023-079243
PMCID: PMC10860023
PMID: 38320842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No conflicts of interest or 
competing interests reported by any authors related to this work. Dr. Duggal is 
on the Advisory Board for ALung technologies, but that relationship has no 
impact on this work.


195. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2017 Jul;2017:2205-2208. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2017.8037292.

Self-reported well-being score modelling and prediction: Proof-of-concept of an 
approach based on linear dynamic systems.

Xinyang Li, Poli R, Valenza G, Scilingo EP, Citi L.

Assessment and recognition of perceived well-being has wide applications in the 
development of assistive healthcare systems for people with physical and mental 
disorders. In practical data collection, these systems need to be less 
intrusive, and respect users' autonomy and willingness as much as possible. As a 
result, self-reported data are not necessarily available at all times. 
Conventional classifiers, which usually require feature vectors of a prefixed 
dimension, are not well suited for this problem. To address the issue of 
non-uniformly sampled measurements, in this study we propose a method for the 
modelling and prediction of self-reported well-being scores based on a linear 
dynamic system. Within the model, we formulate different features as 
observations, making predictions even in the presence of inconsistent and 
irregular data. We evaluate the proposed method with synthetic data, as well as 
real data from two patients diagnosed with cancer. In the latter, self-reported 
scores from three well-being-related scales were collected over a period of 
approximately 60 days. Prompted each day, the patients had the choice whether to 
respond or not. Results show that the proposed model is able to track and 
predict the patients' perceived well-being dynamics despite the irregularly 
sampled data.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2017.8037292
PMID: 29060334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Front Physiol. 2021 Jan 11;11:612590. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.612590. 
eCollection 2020.

Searching for Errors in Models of Complex Dynamic Systems.

Kahl D(1), Kschischo M(1).

Author information:
(1)Mathematics and Technology, University of Applied Sciences Koblenz, Koblenz, 
Germany.

Mathematical modeling is seen as a key step to understand, predict, and control 
the temporal dynamics of interacting systems in such diverse areas like physics, 
biology, medicine, and economics. However, for large and complex systems we 
usually have only partial knowledge about the network, the coupling functions, 
and the interactions with the environment governing the dynamic behavior. This 
incomplete knowledge induces structural model errors which can in turn be the 
cause of erroneous model predictions or misguided interpretations. Uncovering 
the location of such structural model errors in large networks can be a daunting 
task for a modeler. Here, we present a data driven method to search for 
structural model errors and to confine their position in large and complex 
dynamic networks. We introduce a coherence measure for pairs of network nodes, 
which indicates, how difficult it is to distinguish these nodes as sources of an 
error. By clustering network nodes into coherence groups and inferring the 
cluster inputs we can decide, which cluster is affected by an error. We 
demonstrate the utility of our method for the C. elegans neural network, for a 
signal transduction model for UV-B light induced morphogenesis and for synthetic 
examples.

Copyright © 2021 Kahl and Kschischo.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.612590
PMCID: PMC7830364
PMID: 33505318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


197. Front Psychol. 2022 Jan 3;12:761093. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.761093. eCollection 
2021.

The Impact of an Intensive English Reading Course Based on the 
Production-Oriented Approach on the L2 Motivational Self System Among Chinese 
University English Majors From a Dynamic Systems Theory Perspective.

Li C(1), Zhou C(1)(2), Zhang W(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Foreign Languages, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)New Channel Wuhan School, Wuhan, China.
(3)Jianghan Oilfield Senior Middle School, Qianjiang, China.

This article reports on a study that took a Dynamic Systems Theory (DST) 
perspective to second language (L2) motivational self system (L2MSS). More 
specifically, it investigated the influence of an Intensive English Reading 
course based on the Production-Oriented Approach (POA) upon the L2MSS of Chinese 
university English majorsfrom the DST perspective. To this end, two intact 
classes composed of 50 students were assigned into experimental group (EG) (N = 
23) and control group (CG) (N = 27), who responded to an L2MSS scale before and 
after the one-semester intervention. Eight and five students were respectively 
selected using the purposive sampling method from the experimental and control 
groups for follow-up semi-structured interviews. The quantitative results 
revealed that the overall and dimensional (Ideal L2 Self and L2 Learning 
Experience) levels of L2MSS were significantly strengthened over time in the EG 
while kept stable in the CG. The qualitative results suggested that the enhanced 
Ideal L2 Self of the participants stemmed from an attractor basin that was 
deepened by a number of attractors encompassing Output Tasks and Peer 
Performance. The interview results also showed that the increased L2 Learning 
Experience of the participants pertained to an attractor basin that was 
consolidated by an array of attractors containing Output Tasks, Teacher 
Guidance, Group Discussion, and Peer Assessment. The findings indicated that the 
attractors at the subjective and social dimensions in the POA-based course 
collectively worked together to cause changes in L2MSS among the participants. 
The implications for intervening L2 motivation from a POA approach in English as 
a Foreign Language (EFL) classrooms were discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Zhou and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.761093
PMCID: PMC8762362
PMID: 35046867

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


198. Curr Res Toxicol. 2024 Dec 18;8:100210. doi: 10.1016/j.crtox.2024.100210. 
eCollection 2025.

A computational dynamic systems model for in silico prediction of neural tube 
closure defects.

Berkhout JH(1)(2), Glazier JA(3), Piersma AH(1)(2), Belmonte JM(4), Legler J(2), 
Spencer RM(5), Knudsen TB(3)(5), Heusinkveld HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(2)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Biocomplexity Institute, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA.
(4)Department of Physics, NC State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(5)U.S. EPA/ORD, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Neural tube closure is a critical morphogenetic event during early vertebrate 
development. This complex process is susceptible to perturbation by genetic 
errors and chemical disruption, which can induce severe neural tube defects 
(NTDs) such as spina bifida. We built a computational agent-based model (ABM) of 
neural tube development based on the known biology of morphogenetic signals and 
cellular biomechanics underlying neural fold elevation, bending and fusion. The 
computer model functionalizes cell signals and responses to render a dynamic 
representation of neural tube closure. Perturbations in the control network can 
then be introduced synthetically or from biological data to yield quantitative 
simulation and probabilistic prediction of NTDs by incidence and degree of 
defect. Translational applications of the model include mechanistic 
understanding of how singular or combinatorial alterations in gene-environmental 
interactions and animal-free assessment of developmental toxicity for an 
important human birth defect (spina bifida) and potentially other neurological 
problems linked to development of the brain and spinal cord.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.crtox.2024.100210
PMCID: PMC11875186
PMID: 40034255

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


199. Front Psychol. 2023 Oct 6;14:1292756. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1292756. 
eCollection 2023.

Corrigendum: "A new hope" for positive psychology: a dynamic systems 
reconceptualization of hope theory.

Colla R(1), Williams P(1), Oades LG(1), Camacho-Morles J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Wellbeing Science, Melbourne Graduate School of Education, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Erratum for
    Front Psychol. 2022 Feb 23;13:809053. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.809053.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.809053.].

Copyright © 2023 Colla, Williams, Oades and Camacho-Morles.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1292756
PMCID: PMC10588786
PMID: 37868600


200. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2010 Apr;57(1-2):70-1. doi: 
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2010.01104.x.

Static and dynamic systems in Rickettsia slovaca life cycle evaluated by 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.

Spitalská E(1), Sparagano O, Boldis V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia.

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to characterize the 
growth of Rickettsia slovaca, a tick-borne pathogen transmitted by Dermacentor 
reticulatus and D. marginatus ticks, in static (L929 and Vero cells) and dynamic 
(D. marginatus and Ixodes ricinus ticks) cultivation systems. The highest points 
of bacterial multiplication and the time-spans between the inoculum and the 
maximum of rickettsial copies were increased in consecutive order from 
eukaryotic cells, I. ricinus to D. marginatus systems. In dynamic system, 
multiplication maximum of R. slovaca was achieved 9 days earlier in I. ricinus; 
however, the number of rickettsial DNA copies was approximately 3.6 x 10(6) more 
in D. marginatus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2010.01104.x
PMID: 20537110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci. 2017 Aug;473(2204):20160891. doi: 
10.1098/rspa.2016.0891. Epub 2017 Aug 30.

Recursive modular modelling methodology for lumped-parameter dynamic systems.

Orsino RMM(1).

Author information:
(1)Offshore Mechanics Laboratory, Mechanical Engineering Department, Escola 
Politécnica, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

This paper proposes a novel approach to the modelling of lumped-parameter 
dynamic systems, based on representing them by hierarchies of mathematical 
models of increasing complexity instead of a single (complex) model. Exploring 
the multilevel modularity that these systems typically exhibit, a general 
recursive modelling methodology is proposed, in order to conciliate the use of 
the already existing modelling techniques. The general algorithm is based on a 
fundamental theorem that states the conditions for computing projection 
operators recursively. Three procedures for these computations are discussed: 
orthonormalization, use of orthogonal complements and use of generalized 
inverses. The novel methodology is also applied for the development of a 
recursive algorithm based on the Udwadia-Kalaba equation, which proves to be 
identical to the one of a Kalman filter for estimating the state of a static 
process, given a sequence of noiseless measurements representing the constraints 
that must be satisfied by the system.

DOI: 10.1098/rspa.2016.0891
PMCID: PMC5582173
PMID: 28878552

Conflict of interest statement: I declare I have no competing interests.


202. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2023 Oct;34(10):6714-6724. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3222265. Epub 2023 Oct 6.

An Online Active Broad Learning Approach for Real-Time Safety Assessment of 
Dynamic Systems in Nonstationary Environments.

Liu Z, Zhang Y, Ding Z, He X.

Real-time safety assessment of the complex dynamic systems in nonstationary 
environments is of great significance for avoiding the potential hazards. In 
this case, the update procedure with high assessment accuracy and training speed 
is crucial and meaningful in the dynamic streaming setting. Generally, the 
performance of most online learning approaches will be negatively affected by 
limited annotated samples in such a setting. Moreover, the time cost of advanced 
conventional methods with retaining procedures is relatively high, constraining 
their practicality. In this article, a novel online active broad learning 
approach, termed OABL, is proposed. In detail, the effectiveness of the broad 
learning system in the framework of online active learning is first revealed and 
verified. A reasonable dynamic asymmetric query strategy is then designed with a 
limited annotation budget to actively annotate the relatively valuable samples, 
which is beneficial to mitigating the negative effects of class imbalance. In 
this context, the advantage of the human-in-the-loop characteristic is also 
effectively used to control the evolution direction of the learner during the 
incremental update, which makes it better able to adapt to complex and 
nonstationary environments. Several related experiments are conducted with the 
realistic data of JiaoLong deep-sea manned submersible. Results show the 
effectiveness and practicality of the proposal compared with the existing 
advanced approaches.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3222265
PMID: 36417729


203. J Proteome Res. 2010 May 7;9(5):2087-97. doi: 10.1021/pr9007738.

Multitagging proteomic strategy to estimate protein turnover rates in dynamic 
systems.

Jayapal KP(1), Sui S, Philp RJ, Kok YJ, Yap MG, Griffin TJ, Hu WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of 
Minnesota, 421 Washington Avenue SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Current techniques for quantitative proteomics focus mainly on measuring overall 
protein dynamics, which is the net result of protein synthesis and degradation. 
Understanding the rate of this synthesis/degradation is essential to fully 
appreciate cellular dynamics and bridge the gap between transcriptome and 
proteome data. Protein turnover rates can be estimated through "label-chase" 
experiments employing stable isotope-labeled precursors; however, the implicit 
assumption of steady-state in such analyses may not be applicable for many 
intrinsically dynamic systems. In this study, we present a novel extension of 
the "label-chase" concept using SILAC and a secondary labeling step with iTRAQ 
reagents to estimate protein turnover rates in Streptomyces coelicolor cultures 
undergoing transition from exponential growth to stationary phase. Such 
processes are of significance in Streptomyces biology as they pertain to the 
onset of synthesis of numerous therapeutically important secondary metabolites. 
The dual labeling strategy enabled decoupling of labeled peptide identification 
and quantification of degradation dynamics at MS and MS/MS scans respectively. 
Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of these multitagged proteins enabled 
estimation of degradation rates for 115 highly abundant proteins in S. 
coelicolor. We compared the rate constants obtained using this dual labeling 
approach with those from a SILAC-only analysis (assuming steady-state) and show 
that significant differences are generally observed only among proteins 
displaying considerable temporal dynamics and that the directions of these 
differences are largely consistent with theoretical predictions.

DOI: 10.1021/pr9007738
PMID: 20184388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2018 Apr;29(4):1275-1286. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2017.2672998. Epub 2017 Mar 6.

Adaptive Sliding Mode Control of Dynamic Systems Using Double Loop Recurrent 
Neural Network Structure.

Fei J, Lu C.

In this paper, an adaptive sliding mode control system using a double loop 
recurrent neural network (DLRNN) structure is proposed for a class of nonlinear 
dynamic systems. A new three-layer RNN is proposed to approximate unknown 
dynamics with two different kinds of feedback loops where the firing weights and 
output signal calculated in the last step are stored and used as the feedback 
signals in each feedback loop. Since the new structure has combined the 
advantages of internal feedback NN and external feedback NN, it can acquire the 
internal state information while the output signal is also captured, thus the 
new designed DLRNN can achieve better approximation performance compared with 
the regular NNs without feedback loops or the regular RNNs with a single 
feedback loop. The new proposed DLRNN structure is employed in an equivalent 
controller to approximate the unknown nonlinear system dynamics, and the 
parameters of the DLRNN are updated online by adaptive laws to get favorable 
approximation performance. To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed 
controller, the designed adaptive sliding mode controller with the DLRNN is 
applied to a -axis microelectromechanical system gyroscope to control the 
vibrating dynamics of the proof mass. Simulation results demonstrate that the 
proposed methodology can achieve good tracking property, and the comparisons of 
the approximation performance between radial basis function NN, RNN, and DLRNN 
show that the DLRNN can accurately estimate the unknown dynamics with a fast 
speed while the internal states of DLRNN are more stable.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2017.2672998
PMID: 28287991


205. Physiother Theory Pract. 2009 Nov;25(8):544-54. doi: 10.3109/09593980802667888.

Bridging the gap between theory and practice: dynamic systems theory as a 
framework for understanding and promoting recovery of function in children and 
youth with acquired brain injuries.

Levac D(1), DeMatteo C.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Applied Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada. levacde@mcmaster.ca

A theoretical framework can help physiotherapists understand and promote 
recovery of function in children and youth with acquired brain injuries (ABI). 
Physiotherapy interventions for this population have traditionally been based in 
hierarchical-maturational theories of motor development emphasizing the role of 
the central nervous system (CNS) in controlling motor behaviour. In contrast, 
Dynamic Systems Theory (DST) views movement as resulting from the interaction of 
many subsystems within the individual, features of the functional task to be 
accomplished, and the environmental context in which the movement takes place. 
DST is now a predominant theoretical framework in pediatric physiotherapy. The 
purpose of this article is to describe how DST can be used to understand and 
promote recovery of function after pediatric ABI. A DST-based approach for 
children and youth with ABI does not treat the impaired CNS in isolation but 
rather emphasizes the role of all subsystems, including the family and the 
environment, in influencing recovery. The emphasis is on exploration, problem 
solving, and practice of functional tasks. A case scenario provides practical 
recommendations for the use of DST to inform physiotherapy interventions and 
clinical decision making in the acute phase of recovery from ABI. Future 
research is required to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions based in 
this theoretical framework.

DOI: 10.3109/09593980802667888
PMID: 19925262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2022 Jun;52(6):5113-5123. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2020.3027549. 
Epub 2022 Jun 16.

A Fault Diagnosability Evaluation Method for Dynamic Systems Without 
Distribution Knowledge.

Fu F, Xue T, Wu Z, Wang D.

This article addresses the quantitative fault diagnosability evaluation for 
dynamic systems without distribution knowledge. The system dynamics in different 
cases are first characterized by mean vectors and covariance matrices. Then, 
fault detectability and isolability are defined based on the constructed 
characteristics. On this basis, the Mahalanobis distance (MD) is employed to 
propose a fault diagnosability analysis measure. Furthermore, model-based and 
data-driven algorithms for fault diagnosability evaluation are given according 
to the MD-based measure. In addition, the reliabilities of the evaluation 
results are considered by taking advantage of ambiguity sets of mean vectors and 
covariance matrices of the system dynamics. Finally, two examples are employed 
to verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2020.3027549
PMID: 33112756


207. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2018 Feb;48(2):543-555. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2016.2646483. Epub 
2017 Jan 26.

The Roles of Feedback and Feedforward as Humans Learn to Control Unknown Dynamic 
Systems.

Zhang X, Wang S, Hoagg JB, Seigler TM.

We present results from an experiment in which human subjects interact with an 
unknown dynamic system 40 times during a two-week period. During each 
interaction, subjects are asked to perform a command-following (i.e., pursuit 
tracking) task. Each subject's performance at that task improves from the first 
trial to the last trial. For each trial, we use subsystem identification to 
estimate each subject's feedforward (or anticipatory) control, feedback (or 
reactive) control, and feedback time delay. Over the 40 trials, the magnitudes 
of the identified feedback controllers and the identified feedback time delays 
do not change significantly. In contrast, the identified feedforward controllers 
do change significantly. By the last trial, the average identified feedforward 
controller approximates the inverse of the dynamic system. This observation 
provides evidence that a fundamental component of human learning is updating the 
anticipatory control until it models the inverse dynamics.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2016.2646483
PMID: 28141541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Chem Phys. 2020 Aug 7;153(5):054107. doi: 10.1063/5.0018558.

Different time scales in dynamic systems with multiple outcomes.

Bel G(1), Zilman A(2), Kolomeisky AB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Solar Energy and Environmental Physics, BIDR, and Department of 
Physics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boqer Campus 8499000, Israel.
(2)Department of Physics and Institute for Biomaterials and Bioengineering, 
University of Toronto, 60 Saint George St., Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A7, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Department of Physics and 
Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005-1892, USA.

Stochastic biochemical and transport processes have various final outcomes, and 
they can be viewed as dynamic systems with multiple exits. Many current 
theoretical studies, however, typically consider only a single time scale for 
each specific outcome, effectively corresponding to a single-exit process and 
assuming the independence of each exit process. However, the presence of other 
exits influences the statistical properties and dynamics measured at any 
specific exit. Here, we present theoretical arguments to explicitly show the 
existence of different time scales, such as mean exit times and inverse exit 
fluxes, for dynamic processes with multiple exits. This implies that the 
statistics of any specific exit dynamics cannot be considered without taking 
into account the presence of other exits. Several illustrative examples are 
described in detail using analytical calculations, mean-field estimates, and 
kinetic Monte Carlo computer simulations. The underlying microscopic mechanisms 
for the existence of different time scales are discussed. The results are 
relevant for understanding the mechanisms of various biological, chemical, and 
industrial processes, including transport through channels and pores.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0018558
PMID: 32770919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Jun;930:452-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb05768.x.

A dynamic systems model of musically induced emotions. Physiological and 
self-report evidence.

Thayer JF(1), Faith ML.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Aging, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, National Institutes of 
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. thayer@1pc.grc.nia.nih.gov

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb05768.x
PMID: 11458866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2018 Jul;188:65-73. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2018.05.010. Epub 
2018 May 31.

Can gender priming eliminate the effects of stereotype threat? The case of 
simple dynamic systems.

Lungwitz V(1), Sedlmeier P(2), Schwarz M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research Methods and Evaluation in Psychology, Technische 
Universität Chemnitz, Germany. Electronic address: 
vivien.lungwitz@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de.
(2)Department of Research Methods and Evaluation in Psychology, Technische 
Universität Chemnitz, Germany.

Mathematics and mental rotation are classic fields where it has been shown that 
priming women with their gender identity impedes performance. Whereas past 
research focused mainly on stereotype threat effects in women in a narrowly 
defined context, this study broadened the research focus: We primed 264 women 
and men equally with a male, a neutral, or a female prime before they had to 
solve a simple dynamic system task. As expected, female-primed women 
subsequently performed worst of all six groups. Solution rates were almost 14% 
higher for the women in the male-primed condition. Men performed better than 
women in all three priming conditions. However, this difference was reduced in 
the male-primed condition as women's performance had increased as anticipated. 
Unexpected was a decline in the male performance in the same condition. The 
study showed that gender priming had a significant effect on women in tasks 
involving simple dynamic systems. However, mathematical knowledge and area of 
occupation clearly were stronger predictors for both men and women. Priming 
alone cannot eliminate the effects of stereotype threat.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2018.05.010
PMID: 29860207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2008 Jun 15;100(3):542-59. doi: 10.1002/bit.21780.

Integrating cybernetic modeling with pathway analysis provides a dynamic, 
systems-level description of metabolic control.

Young JD(1), Henne KL, Morgan JA, Konopka AE, Ramkrishna D.

Author information:
(1)Forney Hall of Chemical Engineering, 480 Stadium Mall Drive, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Cybernetic modeling strives to uncover the inbuilt regulatory programs of 
biological systems and leverage them toward computational prediction of 
metabolic dynamics. Because of its focus on incorporating the global aims of 
metabolism, cybernetic modeling provides a systems-oriented approach for 
describing regulatory inputs and inferring the impact of regulation within 
biochemical networks. Combining cybernetic control laws with concepts from 
metabolic pathway analysis has culminated in a systematic strategy for 
constructing cybernetic models, which was previously lacking. The newly devised 
framework relies upon the simultaneous application of local controls that 
maximize the net flux through each elementary flux mode and global controls that 
modulate the activities of these modes to optimize the overall nutritional state 
of the cell. The modeling concepts are illustrated using a simple linear pathway 
and a larger network representing anaerobic E. coli central metabolism. The E. 
coli model successfully describes the metabolic shift that occurs upon deleting 
the pta-ackA operon that is responsible for fermentative acetate production. The 
model also furnishes predictions that are consistent with experimental results 
obtained from additional knockout strains as well as strains expressing 
heterologous genes. Because of the stabilizing influence of the included control 
variables, the resulting cybernetic models are more robust and reliable than 
their predecessors in simulating the network response to imposed genetic and 
environmental perturbations.

(c) 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.21780
PMID: 18438875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Dent Educ. 2012 Feb;16(1):43-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0579.2011.00718.x. 
Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Dynamic Systems (Complexity) theory as a new conceptual model for researching 
PBL in dental education.

Townsend GC(1), Kim M, Sankey D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Oro-facial Research and Learning (CORAL), School of Dentistry, The 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. 
grant.townsend@adelaide.edu.au

Although problem-based learning (PBL) was introduced into dental education some 
20 years ago, there have been relatively few well-designed studies carried out 
to clarify whether, how or why it works in a dental context. This paper 
introduces the Dynamic Systems (Complexity) theory as a new and potentially 
productive theoretical framework for researching PBL in dental education. This 
framework emphasises the importance of emergent self-organisation, perception 
and brain plasticity in learning. In this paper, a brief overview of the history 
of PBL in dentistry is presented and then the fundamentals of a Dynamic Systems 
Approach (DSA) are explained, drawing on two recently published papers 
advocating the DSA in medical education and teacher education. We focus on three 
key points related to this new approach: emergent self-organisation rather than 
simple construction of knowledge; the notion that perception drives the learning 
process; and the brain as the substrate of all learning. The paper also suggests 
how the DSA can help us move forward, both in terms of the future application of 
PBL in dental education and also in relation to posing new types of research 
questions.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0579.2011.00718.x
PMID: 22251326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2018 Aug;29(8):3599-3609. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2017.2731865. Epub 2017 Aug 18.

Event-Based Impulsive Control of Continuous-Time Dynamic Systems and Its 
Application to Synchronization of Memristive Neural Networks.

Zhu W, Wang D, Liu L, Feng G.

This paper investigates exponential stabilization of continuous-time dynamic 
systems (CDSs) via event-based impulsive control (EIC) approaches, where the 
impulsive instants are determined by certain state-dependent triggering 
condition. The global exponential stability criteria via EIC are derived for 
nonlinear and linear CDSs, respectively. It is also shown that there is no 
Zeno-behavior for the concerned closed loop control system. In addition, the 
developed event-based impulsive scheme is applied to the synchronization problem 
of master and slave memristive neural networks. Furthermore, a self-triggered 
impulsive control scheme is developed to avoid continuous communication between 
the master system and slave system. Finally, two numerical simulation examples 
are presented to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed event-based 
impulsive controllers.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2017.2731865
PMID: 28829318


214. Eur Phys J E Soft Matter. 2013 Dec;36(12):137. doi: 10.1140/epje/i2013-13137-5. 
Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Convolution theory for dynamic systems: a bottom-up approach to the 
viscoelasticity of polymeric networks.

von Hansen Y(1), Rode S, Netz RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195, Berlin, Germany, 
yann.von.hansen@fu-berlin.de.

Biological materials such as the cytoskeleton are characterized by remarkable 
viscoelastic properties and therefore represent the subject of numerous micro- 
and macrorheological experimental studies. By generalizing the previously 
introduced dynamic convolution theory (DCT) to two dimensions, we devise a 
bottom-up approach for the viscoelastic properties of extended, crosslinked 
semiflexible polymer networks. Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations serve to 
determine the dynamic linear self- and cross-response properties of isolated 
semiflexible polymers to externally applied forces and torques; these response 
functions are used as input to the DCT. For a given network topology, the 
frequency-dependent response of the network subject to a given external 
force/torque distribution is calculated via the DCT allowing to resolve both 
micro- and macrorheological properties of the networks. A mapping on continuum 
viscoelastic theory yields the corresponding viscoelastic bulk moduli. Special 
attention is drawn to the flexibility of crosslinkers, which couple angular 
degrees of freedom at the network nodes and which are found to sensitively 
affect the resulting rheological properties of the polymeric meshwork.

DOI: 10.1140/epje/i2013-13137-5
PMID: 24326906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Anal Psychol. 2001 Oct;46(4):637-54. doi: 10.1111/1465-5922.00271.

Principle of organization: a dynamic-systems view of the archetype-as-such.

McDowell MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)maxmcdowell@earthlink.net

The personality is a dynamic system. Like all other dynamic systems, it must be 
self-organized. In this paper I focus upon the archetype-as-such, that is, upon 
the essential core around which both an archetypical image and a complex are 
organized. I argue that an archetype-as-such is a pre-existing principle of 
organization. Within the personality that principle manifests itself as a 
psychological vortex (a complex) into which we are drawn. The vortex is 
impersonal. We mediate it through myths and rituals or through consciousness. In 
this paper I show that Jung's intuition about the archetype-as-such is supported 
by recent science. I evaluate other concepts of the archetype. My concept is 
different from that proposed recently by Saunders and Skar. My concept allows 
each archetype-as-such to be defined precisely in mathematical terms. It 
suggests a new interpretation of mythology. It also addresses our spiritual 
experience of an archetype. Because the archetypes-as-such are fundamental to 
the personality, the better we understand them the better we understand our 
patients. The paper is grounded with clinical examples.

DOI: 10.1111/1465-5922.00271
PMID: 11675895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Chem Phys. 2007 Apr 7;126(13):134506. doi: 10.1063/1.2718528.

Transition functions and correlation functions in the analysis of dynamic 
systems.

Halpern V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel. 
halpeh@mail.biu.ac.il

An understanding of the dynamic behavior of complex systems such as supercooled 
liquids requires a knowledge of the microscopic processes occurring in them. 
Correlation functions, which can be derived from experimental measurements of 
macroscopic properties or from computer simulations, cannot distinguish between 
particles that have never moved and those that have changed their position or 
state and then returned to the original one. Such a distinction can be obtained 
from the comparison of a correlation function with the transition function, 
i.e., the fraction of particles that have never moved up to time t. As the 
author demonstrates by an extension of his recently published results for the 
ferromagnetic Potts model [J. Chem. Phys. 124, 214508 (2006)], valuable insights 
into the microscopic behavior of a system can be obtained from such a 
comparison. A generalization of the transition function to a first passage 
function can provide useful extra insights.

DOI: 10.1063/1.2718528
PMID: 17430046


217. Conserv Biol. 2017 Oct;31(5):1018-1028. doi: 10.1111/cobi.12899. Epub 2017 May 
4.

The importance of incorporating functional habitats into conservation planning 
for highly mobile species in dynamic systems.

Webb MH(1), Terauds A(1), Tulloch A(1), Bell P(2), Stojanovic D(1), Heinsohn 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Fenner School of Environment and Society, Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Tasmania, Sandy Bay, Tasmania, 7005, 
Australia.

The distribution of mobile species in dynamic systems can vary greatly over time 
and space. Estimating their population size and geographic range can be 
problematic and affect the accuracy of conservation assessments. Scarce data on 
mobile species and the resources they need can also limit the type of analytical 
approaches available to derive such estimates. We quantified change in 
availability and use of key ecological resources required for breeding for a 
critically endangered nomadic habitat specialist, the Swift Parrot (Lathamus 
discolor). We compared estimates of occupied habitat derived from dynamic 
presence-background (i.e., presence-only data) climatic models with estimates 
derived from dynamic occupancy models that included a direct measure of food 
availability. We then compared estimates that incorporate fine-resolution 
spatial data on the availability of key ecological resources (i.e., functional 
habitats) with more common approaches that focus on broader climatic suitability 
or vegetation cover (due to the absence of fine-resolution data). The occupancy 
models produced significantly (P < 0.001) smaller (up to an order of magnitude) 
and more spatially discrete estimates of the total occupied area than 
climate-based models. The spatial location and extent of the total area occupied 
with the occupancy models was highly variable between years (131 and 1498 km2 ). 
Estimates accounting for the area of functional habitats were significantly 
smaller (2-58% [SD 16]) than estimates based only on the total area occupied. An 
increase or decrease in the area of one functional habitat (foraging or nesting) 
did not necessarily correspond to an increase or decrease in the other. Thus, an 
increase in the extent of occupied area may not equate to improved habitat 
quality or function. We argue these patterns are typical for mobile resource 
specialists but often go unnoticed because of limited data over relevant spatial 
and temporal scales and lack of spatial data on the availability of key 
resources. Understanding changes in the relative availability of functional 
habitats is crucial to informing conservation planning and accurately assessing 
extinction risk for mobile resource specialists.

© 2017 Society for Conservation Biology.

DOI: 10.1111/cobi.12899
PMID: 28130909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2022 Jun;33(6):2615-2629. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136357. Epub 2022 Jun 1.

Echo State Networks for Practical Nonlinear Model Predictive Control of Unknown 
Dynamic Systems.

Jordanou JP, Antonelo EA, Camponogara E.

Nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) of industrial processes is changeling 
in part because the model of the plant may not be completely known but also for 
being computationally demanding. This work proposes an extremely efficient 
reservoir computing (RC)-based control framework that speeds up the NMPC of 
processes. In this framework, while an echo state network (ESN) serves as the 
dynamic RC-based system model of a process, the practical nonlinear model 
predictive controller (PNMPC) simplifies NMPC by splitting the forced and the 
free responses of the trained ESN, yielding the so-called ESN-PNMPC 
architecture. While the free response is generated by the forward simulation of 
the ESN model, the forced response is obtained by a fast and recursive 
calculation of the input-output sensitivities from the ESN. The efficiency not 
only results from the fast training inherited by RC but also from a 
computationally cheap control action given by the aforementioned novel recursive 
formulation and the computation in the reduced dimension space of input and 
output signals. The resulting architecture, equipped with a correction filter, 
is robust to unforeseen disturbances. The potential of the ESN-PNMPC is shown by 
application to the control of the four-tank system and an oil production 
platform, outperforming the predictive approach with a long-short term memory 
(LSTM) model, two standard linear control algorithms, and approximate predictive 
control.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136357
PMID: 34962887


219. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2003;14(2):426-31. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2003.809409.

Exponential stability of globally projected dynamic systems.

Gao XB(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Math., Shaanxi Normal Univ., China.

In this paper, we further analyze and prove the stability and convergence of the 
dynamic system proposed by Friesz et al.(1994), whose equilibria solve the 
associated variational inequality problems. Two sufficient conditions are 
provided to ensure the asymptotic stability of this system with a monotone and 
asymmetric mapping by means of an energy function. Meanwhile this system with a 
monotone and gradient mapping is also proved to be asymptotically stable using 
another energy function. Furthermore, the exponential stability of this system 
is also shown under strongly monotone condition. Some obtained results improve 
the existing ones and the given conditions can be easily checked in practice. 
Since this dynamic system has wide applications, the obtained results are 
significant in both theory and applications.

DOI: 10.1109/TNN.2003.809409
PMID: 18238024


220. J Psychopathol Clin Sci. 2025 May;134(4):469-482. doi: 10.1037/abn0000991. Epub 
2025 Mar 20.

Understanding types of transitions in clinical change: An introduction from the 
complex dynamic systems perspective.

Cui J(1), Hasselman F(2), Olthof M(1), Lichtwarck-Aschoff A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Behavioural and Social Sciences, University of Groningen.
(2)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University.

Erratum in
    J Psychopathol Clin Sci. 2025 Nov;134(8):1038. doi: 10.1037/abn0001061.

Sudden changes are common in clinical trajectories. While theoretical work in 
complex dynamic systems has provided mathematical theories for various types and 
mechanisms of change, a concrete application for the field of psychopathology is 
still lacking. We aim to bridge this gap by outlining an applied theoretical 
framework using theoretical concepts of the natural sciences for the field of 
clinical psychopathology, also devoting attention to issues and providing 
recommendations that are specific to the psychopathology domain. First, the 
mechanisms and features of four distinct types of transitions are introduced: 
bifurcation-induced tipping (B-tipping), noise-induced tipping (N-tipping), 
rate-induced tipping (R-tipping), and noise-induced diffusion (N-diffusion). 
Those types of transitions differ in the main cause of the change and data 
characteristics. To illustrate their application to clinical phenomena, we 
present two real-life scenarios using simulated time series. These examples 
demonstrate how theoretical types of change may connect to clinical phenomena 
and highlight how different types of transitions can co-occur in various 
subsystems. In the first example, we show that the mood system and the momentary 
affect system of a patient with sudden loss may show B-tipping and N-diffusion 
at the same time; in the second example, we show that increasing the stimulus 
strengthening speed in exposure therapy may lead to R-tipping, while the 
therapeutic decision in this context may be caused by N-tipping. Finally, we lay 
out possible pathways for determining the appropriate type of transition for 
future empirical research, highlighting methods both from dynamic system 
research and special opportunities for research in clinical psychology. 
(PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/abn0000991
PMID: 40111825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 14;11(4):e0153507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153507. 
eCollection 2016.

Modeling Dynamic Systems with Efficient Ensembles of Process-Based Models.

Simidjievski N(1)(2), Todorovski L(3), Džeroski S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Knowledge Technologies, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.
(2)Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Faculty of Administration, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Ensembles are a well established machine learning paradigm, leading to accurate 
and robust models, predominantly applied to predictive modeling tasks. Ensemble 
models comprise a finite set of diverse predictive models whose combined output 
is expected to yield an improved predictive performance as compared to an 
individual model. In this paper, we propose a new method for learning ensembles 
of process-based models of dynamic systems. The process-based modeling paradigm 
employs domain-specific knowledge to automatically learn models of dynamic 
systems from time-series observational data. Previous work has shown that 
ensembles based on sampling observational data (i.e., bagging and boosting), 
significantly improve predictive performance of process-based models. However, 
this improvement comes at the cost of a substantial increase of the 
computational time needed for learning. To address this problem, the paper 
proposes a method that aims at efficiently learning ensembles of process-based 
models, while maintaining their accurate long-term predictive performance. This 
is achieved by constructing ensembles with sampling domain-specific knowledge 
instead of sampling data. We apply the proposed method to and evaluate its 
performance on a set of problems of automated predictive modeling in three lake 
ecosystems using a library of process-based knowledge for modeling population 
dynamics. The experimental results identify the optimal design decisions 
regarding the learning algorithm. The results also show that the proposed 
ensembles yield significantly more accurate predictions of population dynamics 
as compared to individual process-based models. Finally, while their predictive 
performance is comparable to the one of ensembles obtained with the 
state-of-the-art methods of bagging and boosting, they are substantially more 
efficient.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153507
PMCID: PMC4831761
PMID: 27078633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


222. J Am Psychoanal Assoc. 2014 Apr;62(2):203-35. doi: 10.1177/0003065114531044.

A hundred years of latency: from Freudian psychosexual theory to dynamic systems 
nonlinear development in middle childhood.

Knight R.

A focus on the latency phase is used to illustrate how theory and developmental 
research have influenced our psychoanalytic views of development over the past 
hundred years. Beginning with Freud's psychosexual theory and his conception of 
latency, an historical overview of the major psychoanalytic contributions 
bearing on this developmental period over the past century is presented. Recent 
longitudinal research in latency supports a nonlinear dynamic systems approach 
to development. This approach obliges us to reconsider our linear theories and 
how we think about and work with our patients.

DOI: 10.1177/0003065114531044
PMID: 24737202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Comput Biol. 2026 Feb;33(2):267-279. doi: 10.1177/15578666251382251. Epub 2026 
Feb 2.

Bayesian Validation of Dynamic Systems for Biological Networks.

Son D(1), Kim J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, Canada.
(2)Department of Statistics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.

Dynamic systems encompass a broad class of mathematical models used to describe 
the behavior of complex networks or systems over time. One of the most common 
approaches to modeling such dynamics is through a set of ordinary differential 
equations (ODEs), typically constructed based on hypotheses, known interactions, 
or observed trajectories. However, ODEs are deterministic and inflexible, while 
biological data are typically noisy. Thus, the model fit might not account for 
all possible data variations, and there might be a discrepancy between the 
actual biological process and the assumed model. This discrepancy could lead to 
inaccuracies in the prediction and interpretation of the biological networks. 
Therefore, it is required to validate ODE models in terms of observed data. 
Given that biological networks typically involve multiple sources of errors and 
uncertainties, the validation process should account for these factors. The 
Bayesian approaches offer a robust framework for quantifying errors and 
uncertainties. Thus, in this study, we propose a Bayesian validation method for 
ODE models that addresses model inadequacy, presented as bias. Since the 
proposed method estimates bias as a function of time, it can provide prediction 
bounds for the entire observed time interval. Consequently, it allows for a 
direct evaluation of the model's validity across the whole time interval, and it 
can lead to better prediction by correcting the bias.

DOI: 10.1177/15578666251382251
PMID: 41043952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENTThe authors declare 
they have no competing financial interests.


224. ISA Trans. 2015 May;56:28-41. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2014.11.014. Epub 2014 Dec 
17.

Adaptive variable structure hierarchical fuzzy control for a class of high-order 
nonlinear dynamic systems.

Mansouri M(1), Teshnehlab M(2), Aliyari Shoorehdeli M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Control Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, K.N. 
Toosi University of Technology, P.O. Box 16315-1355, Tehran, Iran. Electronic 
address: mohammad.mansouri@ee.kntu.ac.ir.
(2)Industrial Control Center of Excellence, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
K.N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
teshnehlab@eetd.kntu.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
K.N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
m_aliyari@eetd.kntu.ac.ir.

In this paper, a novel adaptive hierarchical fuzzy control system based on the 
variable structure control is developed for a class of SISO canonical nonlinear 
systems in the presence of bounded disturbances. It is assumed that nonlinear 
functions of the systems be completely unknown. Switching surfaces are 
incorporated into the hierarchical fuzzy control scheme to ensure the system 
stability. A fuzzy soft switching system decides the operation area of the 
hierarchical fuzzy control and variable structure control systems. All the 
nonlinearly appeared parameters of conclusion parts of fuzzy blocks located in 
different layers of the hierarchical fuzzy control system are adjusted through 
adaptation laws deduced from the defined Lyapunov function. The proposed 
hierarchical fuzzy control system reduces the number of rules and consequently 
the number of tunable parameters with respect to the ordinary fuzzy control 
system. Global boundedness of the overall adaptive system and the desired 
precision are achieved using the proposed adaptive control system. In this 
study, an adaptive hierarchical fuzzy system is used for two objectives; it can 
be as a function approximator or a control system based on an 
intelligent-classic approach. Three theorems are proven to investigate the 
stability of the nonlinear dynamic systems. The important point about the 
proposed theorems is that they can be applied not only to hierarchical fuzzy 
controllers with different structures of hierarchical fuzzy controller, but also 
to ordinary fuzzy controllers. Therefore, the proposed algorithm is more 
general. To show the effectiveness of the proposed method four systems (two 
mechanical, one mathematical and one chaotic) are considered in simulations. 
Simulation results demonstrate the validity, efficiency and feasibility of the 
proposed approach to control of nonlinear dynamic systems.

Copyright © 2014 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2014.11.014
PMID: 25528291


225. Biophys J. 2008 Mar 15;94(6):1995-2006. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.115022. Epub 
2007 Nov 30.

SRC family kinases and receptors: analysis of three activation mechanisms by 
dynamic systems modeling.

Fuss H(1), Dubitzky W, Downes CS, Kurth MJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Ireland. 
h.fuss@ulster.ac.uk

Src family kinases (SFKs) interact with a number of cellular receptors. They 
participate in diverse signaling pathways and cellular functions. Most of the 
receptors involved in SFK signaling are characterized by similar modes of 
regulation. This computational study discusses a general kinetic model of 
SFK-receptor interaction. The analysis of the model reveals three major ways of 
SFK activation: release of inhibition by C-terminal Src kinase, weakening of the 
inhibitory intramolecular phosphotyrosine-SH2 interaction, and amplification of 
a stimulating kinase activity. The SFK model was then extended to simulate 
interaction with growth factor and T-cell receptors. The modular SFK signaling 
system was shown to adapt to the requirements of specific signaling contexts and 
yield qualitatively different responses in the different simulated environments. 
The model also provides a systematic overview of the major interactions between 
SFKs and various cellular signaling systems and identifies their common 
properties.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.107.115022
PMCID: PMC2257915
PMID: 18055537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Psychol. 2003 May;39(3):606-17. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.606.

Longitudinal analysis of flexibility and reorganization in early adolescence: a 
dynamic systems study of family interactions.

Granic I(1), Hollenstein T, Dishion TJ, Patterson GR.

Author information:
(1)Community Health Systems Resource Group, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. isabela.granic@sickkids.ca

A dynamic systems (DS) approach was used to study changes in the structure of 
family interactions during the early adolescent transition period. Longitudinal 
observational data were collected in 5 waves prior to, during, and after the 
transition. Boys (n = 149 families) were videotaped problem solving with their 
parents at 9-10 years old and every 2 years thereafter until they were 18 years 
old State space grids (a new DS method) were constructed for all families across 
all waves. Two variables indexing the variability of the family interactions 
were derived from the grids. As hypothesized, the DS variables revealed a 
significant quadratic effect related to a peak in variability at 13-14 years of 
age.

DOI: 10.1037/0012-1649.39.3.606
PMID: 12760527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Anim Sci. 2017 Apr;95(4):1680-1695. doi: 10.2527/jas.2016.0972.

A deterministic, dynamic systems model of cow-calf production: The effects of 
the duration of postpartum anestrus on production parameters over a 10-year 
horizon.

Shane DD, Larson RL, Sanderson MW, Miesner M, White BJ.

The duration of postpartum anestrus (dPPA) is important to consider for 
reproductive performance and efficiency in cow-calf operations. We developed a 
deterministic, dynamic systems model of cow-calf production over a 10-yr horizon 
to model the effects that dPPA had on measures of herd productivity, including 
the percentage of cows cycling before the end of the first 21 d of the breeding 
season (%C21), the percentage of cows pregnant at pregnancy diagnosis (%PPD), 
the distribution of pregnancy by 21-d breeding intervals, the kilograms of calf 
weaned (KW), the kilograms of calf weaned per cow exposed (KPC), and the 
replacement percentage. A 1,000-animal herd was modeled, with the beginning and 
ending dates for a 63-d natural service breeding season being the same for 
eligible replacement heifers (nulliparous cows) and cows (primiparous and 
multiparous cows). Herds were simulated to have a multiparous cow dPPA of 50, 
60, 70, or 80 d, with the dPPA for primiparous cows being set to 50, 60, 70, 80, 
90, 100, or 110 d. Only combinations where the primiparous dPPA was greater than 
or equal to the multiparous dPPA were included, resulting in 22 model herds 
being simulated in the analysis. All other model parameters were held constant 
between simulations. In model season 10, the %C21 was 96.2% when the multiparous 
cow and primiparous cow dPPA was 50 d and was 48.3% when the multiparous cow and 
primiparous cow dPPA was 80 d. The %PPD in model season 10 for these same herds 
was 95.1% and 86.0%, respectively. The percentage of the herd becoming pregnant 
in the first 21 d of the breeding season also differed between these herds 
(61.8% and 31.3%, respectively). The 10-yr total KW was more than 275,000 kg 
greater for the herd with a 50-d multiparous cow and primiparous cow dPPA when 
compared with the herd with the 80-d multiparous and primiparous cow dPPA and 
had a model season 10 KPC of 180.8 kg compared with 151.4 kg for the longer 
dPPA. The model results show that both the multiparous cow and primiparous cow 
dPPA affect herd productivity outcomes and that a dPPA less than 60 d results in 
improved production outcomes relative to longer dPPA. Veterinarians and 
producers should consider determining the dPPA to aid in making management 
decisions to improve reproductive performance of cow-calf herds.

DOI: 10.2527/jas.2016.0972
PMID: 28464100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. ISA Trans. 2025 Nov;166:179-195. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.07.022. Epub 2025 
Jul 14.

Probabilistic fuzzy neural network-based indirect adaptive control framework for 
dynamic systems.

Khater AA(1), Gaballah EM(2), El-Bardini M(3), El-Nagar AM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Egypt. Electronic address: 
abdelaziz.khater@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Egypt. Electronic address: 
eslamgaballah500@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Egypt. Electronic address: 
dralbardini@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(4)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Egypt; Research Institute of 
Sciences & Engineering (RISE), University of Sharjah, United Arab Emirates. 
Electronic address: ahmed.elnagar@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.

This paper introduces a probabilistic Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy neural network 
(PTSK-FNN) within a reliable indirect adaptive control framework that updates 
the gains of proportional - integral - derivative (PID) controller. The reasons 
for introducing this study include effective management of chaotic uncertainties 
by integrating the probabilistic processing with TSK fuzzy neural system, 
improved system identification needed for calculating control signals, and a 
novel law for an online learning algorithm based on the Lyapunov theorem to 
ensure system stability. The proposed controller requires a sensitivity function 
derived from the system model, which can be obtained through identification 
techniques utilizing Wiener model based on PTSK-FNN for modeling both linear and 
nonlinear dynamics of the system. By dynamically modifying both the structure 
and parameters of the PTSK-FNNs, the PID controller gains are updated, leading 
to enhance control performance. This control strategy is implemented for 
nonlinear dynamic systems and compared with other existing controllers, 
demonstrating its effectiveness in engineering applications. Simulation and 
experimental results indicate that the proposed controller significantly 
outperforms its alternatives in mitigating random noise, external disturbances, 
and system uncertainties. The proposed controller shows minimum performance 
indices compared to other published controllers, achieving improved performance 
by reducing the mean absolute error by 34.2 % in simulations and 38.6 % in 
experimental results, compared to higher-performing published controllers.

Copyright © 2025 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.07.022
PMID: 40675894


229. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 23;13(8):e0202337. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202337. 
eCollection 2018.

Assessing the resilience of stochastic dynamic systems under partial 
observability.

Panerati J(1), Schwind N(2), Zeltner S(3), Inoue K(4)(5), Beltrame G(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Génie Informatique et Génie Logiciel, Polytechnique Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Bloomberg L.P., New York, NY, United States of America.
(4)National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)School of Computing, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.

Resilience is a property of major interest for the design and analysis of 
generic complex systems. A system is resilient if it can adjust in response to 
disruptive shocks, and still provide the services it was designed for, without 
interruptions. In this work, we adapt a formal definition of resilience for 
constraint-based systems to a probabilistic framework derived from hidden Markov 
models. This allows us to more realistically model the stochastic evolution and 
partial observability of many complex real-world environments. Within this 
framework, we propose an efficient and exact algorithm for the inference queries 
required to construct generic property checking. We show that the time 
complexity of this algorithm is on par with other state-of-the-art inference 
queries for similar frameworks (that is, linear with respect to the time 
horizon). We also provide considerations on the specific complexity of the 
probabilistic checking of resilience and its connected properties, with 
particular focus on resistance. To demonstrate the flexibility of our approach 
and to evaluate its performance, we examine it in four qualitative and 
quantitative example scenarios: (1) disaster management and damage assessment; 
(2) macroeconomics; (3) self-aware, reconfigurable computing for aerospace 
applications; and (4) connectivity maintenance in robotic swarms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202337
PMCID: PMC6107160
PMID: 30138373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: At the time of submission, one of the authors 
(S.Z) was employed by Bloomberg L.P., a commercial company. This does not alter 
our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


230. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2010 Feb;19(1):34-50. doi: 
10.1044/1058-0360(2009/08-0047). Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Clinical implications of dynamic systems theory for phonological development.

Rvachew S(1), Bernhardt BM.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. susan.rvachew@mcgill.ca

PURPOSE: To examine treatment outcomes in relation to the complexity of 
treatment goals for children with speech sound disorders.
METHOD: The clinical implications of dynamic systems theory in contrast with 
learnability theory are discussed, especially in the context of target selection 
decisions for children with speech sound disorders. Detailed phonological 
analyses of pre-and posttreatment speech samples are provided for 6 children who 
received treatment in a previously published randomized controlled trial of 
contrasting approaches to target selection (Rvachew & Nowak, 2001). Three 
children received treatment for simple target phonemes that did not introduce 
any new feature contrasts into the children's phonological systems. Three 
children received treatment for complex targets that represented feature 
contrasts that were absent from the children's phonological systems.
RESULTS: Children who received treatment for simple targets made more progress 
toward the acquisition of the target sounds and demonstrated emergence of 
complex untreated segments and feature contrasts. Children who received 
treatment for complex targets made little measurable gain in phonological 
development.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment outcomes will be enhanced if the clinician selects 
treatment targets at the segmental and prosodic levels of the phonological 
system in such a way as to stabilize the child's knowledge of subcomponents that 
form the foundation for the emergence of more complex phoneme contrasts.

DOI: 10.1044/1058-0360(2009/08-0047)
PMID: 19644125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2021 May;51(5):2433-2445. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2019.2923461. 
Epub 2021 Apr 15.

Design of Suboptimal Local Piecewise Fuzzy Controller With Multiple Constraints 
for Quasi-Linear Spatiotemporal Dynamic Systems.

Wang JW, Wu HN.

This paper discusses the problem of suboptimal local piecewise H ∞ fuzzy control 
of quasi-linear spatiotemporal dynamic systems with control magnitude 
constraints. A Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy partial differential equation (PDE) model 
with space-varying coefficient matrices is first assumed to be derived for 
exactly describing nonlinear system dynamics. In the light of the fuzzy model, a 
local piecewise fuzzy feedback controller is then constructed to guarantee the 
exponential stability with a prescribed H ∞ disturbance attenuation level for 
the resulting closed-loop system, while the control constraints are also 
ensured. A sufficient condition on the existence of such fuzzy controller is 
developed by the Lyapunov direct method and an integral inequality and presented 
in terms of space algebraic linear matrix inequalities (LMIs) coupled with LMIs. 
By virtue of extreme value theorem, a suboptimal-constrained local piecewise H ∞ 
fuzzy control design in the sense of minimizing the disturbance attenuation 
level is formulated as a minimization optimization problem with LMI constraints. 
Finally, the proposed method is applied to solve the feedback control of a 
quasi-linear FitzHugh-Nagumo equation with space-varying coefficients, and 
simulation results show its effectiveness and merit.

DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2019.2923461
PMID: 31283492


232. J Biomed Res. 2025 Nov 25:1-16. doi: 10.7555/JBR.39.20250335. Online ahead of 
print.

Neuromotor adaptation trajectories in response to core stability training versus 
aerobic training for chronic mechanical low back pain: A dynamic systems 
analysis within a precision rehabilitation framework.

Ali ZA(1), Al-Mufadhi TA(1), Albalawi JM(1), Alanazi SA(1), Alanazi RH(1), 
Alluhidan AL(1), Atallah D(1)(2), Sharari A(1), Allam NM(1)(2), Toson RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and Health Rehabilitation, College of Applied 
Medical Sciences, Jouf University, Al Qurayyat, Al-Jouf Region, 77451, Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy for Surgery, Faculty of Physical Therapy, 
Cairo University, 7 Ahmed El Zayyat Street, Dokki, Giza, 12613, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic mechanical low back pain (CMLBP) is characterized by 
heterogeneous neuromotor responses that limit the effectiveness of standardized 
therapies. The study aimed to characterize neuromotor adaptation trajectories in 
response to core stability versus aerobic training and to develop a predictive 
tool for individualized rehabilitation.
METHODS: Forty-five women with CMLBP (aged 18-45 years) completed 8-week 
intervention programs: core stability plus conventional therapy ( n = 15), 
aerobic exercise plus conventional therapy ( n = 15), or conventional therapy 
alone ( n = 15). Pain, disability, flexibility, and trunk range of motion were 
assessed. Latent class growth analysis identified response trajectories, and a 
machine learning model predicted optimal treatment assignment based on baseline 
profiles.
RESULTS: Four distinct trajectories emerged: fast responders (31.1%), moderate 
responders (33.3%), gradual adapters (22.2%), and minimal responders (13.3%). 
Core stability training resulted in the greatest pain (62.3% reduction) and 
disability reduction (63.6% reduction), with synchronized gain across movement 
and function. Aerobic exercise benefited patients with high movement 
variability. The predictive algorithm classified trajectory membership with an 
accuracy of 83.7%.
CONCLUSION: Distinct neuromotor trajectories underpin variability in CMLBP 
rehabilitation. Early identification of these patterns enables precision 
rehabilitation, where core stability exercise is optimal for patients with 
preserved motor control and proprioception, while aerobic exercise is more 
suitable for those with elevated movement variability. This trajectory-based 
framework provides a clinically relevant model for mechanism-based, personalized 
care.

DOI: 10.7555/JBR.39.20250335
PMID: 41267631


233. Syst Biol (Stevenage). 2006 Sep;153(5):314-7. doi: 10.1049/ip-syb:20060024.

Summation theorems for flux and concentration control coefficients of dynamic 
systems.

Conradie R(1), Westerhoff HV, Rohwer JM, Hofmeyr JH, Snoep JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1, 
Matieland 7602, South Africa.

Metabolic control analysis (MCA) was developed to quantify how system variables 
are affected by parameter variations in a system. In addition, MCA can express 
the global properties of a system in terms of the individual catalytic steps, 
using connectivity and summation theorems to link the control coefficients to 
the elasticity coefficients. MCA was originally developed for steady-state 
analysis and not all summation theorems have been derived for dynamic systems. A 
method to determine time-dependent flux and concentration control coefficients 
for dynamic systems by expressing the time domain as a function of percentage 
progression through any arbitrary fixed interval of time is reported. 
Time-dependent flux and concentration control coefficients of dynamic systems, 
provided that they are evaluated in this novel way, obey the same summation 
theorems as steady-state flux and concentration control coefficients, 
respectively.

DOI: 10.1049/ip-syb:20060024
PMID: 16986306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Psychol. 2009 Sep;45(5):1364-75. doi: 10.1037/a0016713.

Here we go again: a dynamic systems perspective on emotional rigidity across 
parent-adolescent conflicts.

Lichtwarck-Aschoff A(1), Kunnen SE, van Geert PL.

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institut: Developmental Psychopathology, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Montessorilaan 3,Nijmegen 6525 HR, The Netherlands. 
A.Lichtwarck-Aschoff@pwo.ru.nl

The authors used a dynamic systems theoretical approach to examine 
intraindividual variability in emotional responses during the transitional 
period of adolescence. Longitudinal diary data were collected regarding 
conflicts between 17 teenage girls and their mothers over a period of a year. 
The results revealed a reversed u-shaped relation between girls' emotional 
variability and the number of conflicts. Moreover, girls who showed limited 
variability in emotional states across conflict episodes tended to attach the 
same emotional state to divergent conflict topics. Explained as the result of a 
self-organizing process, emotional rigidity (i.e., a lack of variability and 
contextual sensitivity) possibly undermines the adaptive potential of the 
parent-adolescent system in times of relational transitions and developmental 
changes.

DOI: 10.1037/a0016713
PMID: 19702398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2007 Oct;35(5):845-57. doi: 10.1007/s10802-007-9133-4. 
Epub 2007 Jun 5.

A dynamic systems analysis of parent-child changes associated with successful 
"real-world" interventions for aggressive children.

Granic I(1), O'Hara A, Pepler D, Lewis MD.

Author information:
(1)Community Health Systems Resource Group, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 
University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. isabela.granic@sickkids.ca

Studies have shown that improved parenting mediates treatment outcomes for 
aggressive children, but we lack fine-grained descriptions of how parent-child 
interactions change with treatment. The current study addresses this gap by 
applying new dynamic systems methods to study parent-child emotional behavior 
patterns. These methods tap moment-to-moment changes in interaction processes 
within and across sessions and quantify previously unmeasured processes of 
change related to treatment success. Aggressive children and their parents were 
recruited from combined Parent Management Training and Cognitive-behavioral 
programs in "real world" clinical settings. Behavioral outcomes were assessed by 
reports from parents and clinicians. At pre- and post-treatment, home visits 
were videotaped while parents and children discussed consecutively: a positive 
topic, a mutually unresolved problem, and another positive topic. Results showed 
that significant improvements in children's externalizing behavior were 
associated with increases in parent-child emotional flexibility during the 
problem-solving discussion. Also, dyads who improved still expressed negative 
emotions, but they acquired the skills to repair conflicts, shifting out of 
their negative interactions to mutually positive patterns.

DOI: 10.1007/s10802-007-9133-4
PMID: 17549621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. CBE Life Sci Educ. 2006 Winter;5(4):323-31. doi: 10.1187/cbe.06-02-0142.

Assessing students' ability to trace matter in dynamic systems in cell biology.

Wilson CD(1), Anderson CW, Heidemann M, Merrill JE, Merritt BW, Richmond G, 
Sibley DF, Parker JM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Science and Mathematics Education, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

College-level biology courses contain many complex processes that are often 
taught and learned as detailed narratives. These processes can be better 
understood by perceiving them as dynamic systems that are governed by common 
fundamental principles. Conservation of matter is such a principle, and thus 
tracing matter is an essential step in learning to reason about biological 
processes. We present here multiple-choice questions that measure students' 
ability and inclination to trace matter through photosynthesis and cellular 
respiration. Data associated with each question come from students in a large 
undergraduate biology course that was undergoing a shift in instructional 
strategy toward making fundamental principles (such as tracing matter) a central 
theme. We also present findings from interviews with students in the course. Our 
data indicate that 1) many students are not using tracing matter as a tool to 
reason about biological processes, 2) students have particular difficulties 
tracing matter between systems and have a persistent tendency to interconvert 
matter and energy, and 3) instructional changes seem to be effective in 
promoting application of the tracing matter principle. Using these items as 
diagnostic tools allows instructors to be proactive in addressing students' 
misconceptions and ineffective reasoning.

DOI: 10.1187/cbe.06-02-0142
PMCID: PMC1681358
PMID: 17146039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Water Environ Res. 2004 May-Jun;76(3):256-67. doi: 10.2175/106143004x141816.

Relative efficacy of intrinsic and extant parameters for modeling biodegradation 
of synthetic organic compounds in activated sludge: dynamic systems.

Magbanua BS Jr(1), Stanfill JC, Fehniger SM, Smets BF, Farkas F, Grady CP Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Engineering and Science, Clemson University, SC 
29634-0919, USA.

The utility of intrinsic and extant kinetic parameters for simulating the 
dynamic behavior of a biotreatment system coupled with a distributed, 
unstructured, balanced microbial growth model were evaluated against the 
observed response of test reactors to transient loads of synthetic organic 
compounds (SOCs). Biomass from a completely mixed activated-sludge (CMAS) system 
was tested in fed-batch reactors, while a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) was 
tested by measuring SOC concentrations during the fill and react period. Both 
the CMAS system and the SBR were acclimated to a feed containing biogenic 
substrates and several SOCs, and the transient loading tests were conducted with 
biogenic substrates along with one or more SOCs. Extant parameters more closely 
reflect the steady-state degradative capacity of activated-sludge biomass than 
intrinsic parameters and, hence, were expected to be better predictors of system 
performance. However, neither extant nor intrinsic parameters accurately 
predicted system response and neither parameter set was consistently superior to 
the other. Factors that may have contributed to the inability of the model to 
predict system response were identified and discussed. These factors included 
the role of abiotic processes in SOC removal, disparity in the bases used to 
evaluate parameter estimates (substrate mineralization) and reactor performance 
(substrate disappearance), inhibitory substrate interactions under the severe 
loading conditions of the SBR, changes in the physiological state of the biomass 
during the transient loading tests, and the presumed correlation between the 
competent biomass concentration and the influent SOC concentration.

DOI: 10.2175/106143004x141816
PMID: 15338697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. ISA Trans. 2024 Oct;153:191-208. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.07.025. Epub 2024 
Jul 26.

Numerical algorithm for nonlinearity compensation of hardly constrained 
actuation for trajectory tracking control of deadzone-included dynamic systems.

Ebrahimi MM(1), Homaeinezhad MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, K. N. Toosi University of Technology, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, K. N. Toosi University of Technology, 
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mrhomaeinezhad@kntu.ac.ir.

This paper addresses the control of a nonlinear system affected by deadzone 
effects, using a constrained actuator. The system itself incorporates a 
second-order oscillatory dynamic actuator, with an unknown nonlinear 
input-output relationship. The proposed algorithm not only accommodates the 
deadzone constraints on control inputs but also considers the actuator's 
saturation limits in control input calculations. It introduces a trajectory 
tracking mechanism that, instead of directly following the primary trajectory, 
adheres to an alternative trajectory capable of stable tracking, gradually 
converging to the main trajectory while accounting for operational constraints. 
In practical control systems, the actuator's input-output relationship is often 
nonlinear and unknown, requiring inversion for model-based control. This paper 
employs an offline-trained neural network trained on synthetic data to identify 
and approximate the actuator's behavior. To optimize the control system's 
performance and ensure stability during sudden error changes, the control input 
operates in two modes: position and velocity control. This dual-mode control 
allows for continuous switching between the two, facilitated by an innovative 
optimization technique based on the gradient descent method with a variable step 
size. Simulation results validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in 
controlling systems constrained by hard limits and featuring nonlinear 
oscillatory actuators, providing a valuable contribution to the field of control 
systems.

Copyright © 2024 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.07.025
PMID: 39079781

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The manuscript 
includes no potential conflict of interest.


239. Math Biosci. 2006 May;201(1-2):1-207. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2006.01.002. Epub 2006 
Feb 20.

Dynamic systems theory and its applications to biology and environmental 
sciences. Proceedings of an international symposium. March 14-17, 2004. 
Hamamatsu, Japan.

[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2006.01.002
PMID: 16488446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Nonlinear Dynamics Psychol Life Sci. 2005 Jan;9(1):37-60.

Mapping knowledge to boolean dynamic systems in Bateson's epistemology.

Malloy TE(1), Jensen GC, Song T.

Author information:
(1)University of Utah, Department of Psychology, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. 
malloy@pscyh.utah.edu

Gregory Bateson (1972, 1979) established an epistemology that integrates mind 
and nature as a necessary unity, a unity in which learning and evolution share 
fundamental principles and in which criteria for mental process are explicitly 
specified. E42 is a suite of freely available Java applets that constitute an 
online research lab for creating and interacting with simulations of the Boolean 
systems developed by Kauffman (1993) in his study of evolution where he proposed 
that self-organization and natural selection are co-principles "weaving the 
tapestry of life." This paper maps Boolean systems, developed in the study of 
evolution, onto Bateson's epistemology in general and onto his criteria of 
mental process in particular.

PMID: 15629067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Psychopathol Clin Sci. 2025 Nov;134(8):1038. doi: 10.1037/abn0001061. Epub 
2025 Sep 18.

Correction to "Understanding types of transitions in clinical change: An 
introduction from the complex dynamic systems perspective" by Cui et al. (2025).

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    J Psychopathol Clin Sci. 2025 May;134(4):469-482. doi: 10.1037/abn0000991.

Reports an error in "Understanding types of transitions in clinical change: An 
introduction from the complex dynamic systems perspective" by Jingmeng Cui, Fred 
Hasselman, Merlijn Olthof and Anna Lichtwarck-Aschoff (Journal of 
Psychopathology and Clinical Science, 2025[May], Vol 134[4], 469-482; see record 
2025-93753-001). In the article, in Figure 8 the final steps in the decision 
tree were inadvertently reversed: A "Yes" response should lead to B-tipping, and 
a "No" response should lead to R-tipping. The corrected figure is present in the 
erratum. (The following abstract of the original article appeared in record 
2025-93753-001). Sudden changes are common in clinical trajectories. While 
theoretical work in complex dynamic systems has provided mathematical theories 
for various types and mechanisms of change, a concrete application for the field 
of psychopathology is still lacking. We aim to bridge this gap by outlining an 
applied theoretical framework using theoretical concepts of the natural sciences 
for the field of clinical psychopathology, also devoting attention to issues and 
providing recommendations that are specific to the psychopathology domain. 
First, the mechanisms and features of four distinct types of transitions are 
introduced: bifurcation-induced tipping (B-tipping), noise-induced tipping 
(N-tipping), rate-induced tipping (R-tipping), and noise-induced diffusion 
(N-diffusion). Those types of transitions differ in the main cause of the change 
and data characteristics. To illustrate their application to clinical phenomena, 
we present two real-life scenarios using simulated time series. These examples 
demonstrate how theoretical types of change may connect to clinical phenomena 
and highlight how different types of transitions can co-occur in various 
subsystems. In the first example, we show that the mood system and the momentary 
affect system of a patient with sudden loss may show B-tipping and N-diffusion 
at the same time; in the second example, we show that increasing the stimulus 
strengthening speed in exposure therapy may lead to R-tipping, while the 
therapeutic decision in this context may be caused by N-tipping. Finally, we lay 
out possible pathways for determining the appropriate type of transition for 
future empirical research, highlighting methods both from dynamic system 
research and special opportunities for research in clinical psychology. 
(PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/abn0001061
PMID: 40965947


242. ISA Trans. 2020 Mar;98:271-283. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.08.035. Epub 2019 Aug 
21.

Stable adaptive probabilistic Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy controller for dynamic 
systems with uncertainties.

Shaheen O(1), El-Nagar AM(2), El-Bardini M(3), El-Rabaie NM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: omr.shahin@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: ahmed.elnagar@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: dralbardini@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.
(4)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menof, 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: Nabila2100@gmail.com.

In this study, an adaptive probabilistic Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy PID 
(APTSKF-PID) scheme is developed to control nonlinear systems. The proposed 
controller merges the features of the TSK fuzzy logic system, which possess a 
superior performance in system size and learning accuracy than the Mamdani-type 
fuzzy systems and the probabilistic processing method in nonlinear control, 
which handles the system uncertainties. To achieve controlled system stability, 
Lyapunov function is used for tuning the controller parameters. Tuning the 
probability parameters provides an extra degree of flexibility in controller 
design and improves the control performance. Furthermore, to ensure the 
effectiveness of the developed scheme for engineering applications, the proposed 
control technology is introduced to control nonlinear dynamical plants and its 
performance is compared with existing schemes. Simulation tasks indicate that 
the efficiency of APTSKF-PID scheme has high superiority over the other 
controller for external disturbances, random noise and a large scope of system 
uncertainties.

Copyright © 2019 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.08.035
PMID: 31451231

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


243. ISA Trans. 2020 Jan;96:177-184. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.06.015. Epub 2019 Jun 
18.

Fractional-order Hammerstein state-space modeling of nonlinear dynamic systems 
from input-output measurements.

Rahmani MR(1), Farrokhi M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, 
Tehran 1684613114, Iran. Electronic address: mr_rahmani@elec.iust.ac.ir.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering, Center of Excellence for Modeling and 
Control of Complex Systems, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran 
1684613114, Iran. Electronic address: farrokhi@iust.ac.ir.

This paper introduces a continuous-time fractional-order Hammerstein state-space 
model with a systematic identification algorithm for modeling nonlinear dynamic 
systems. The proposed model consists of a radial-basis function neural network 
followed by a fractional-order system. The proposed identification scheme is 
accomplished in two stages. The structural parameters of the fractional-order 
system (i.e. the values of the fractional order and the degree of the 
denominator in the fractional-order system) are estimated in the frequency 
domain. Then, the synaptic weights of the radial-basis function neural network 
and the coefficients of the fractional-order system are determined in the time 
domain via the Lyapunov stability theory, which guarantees stability of the 
given method and its convergence under a mild condition. Three examples are 
provided to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Copyright © 2019 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.06.015
PMID: 31285061

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


244. Comput Math Methods Med. 2023 Dec 13;2023:9753423. doi: 10.1155/2023/9753423. 
eCollection 2023.

Retracted: Network Management System for IoT Based on Dynamic Systems.

Methods In Medicine CAM.

Retraction of
    Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Dec 13;2021:9102095. doi: 
10.1155/2021/9102095.

[This retracts the article DOI: 10.1155/2021/9102095.].

Copyright © 2023 Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/9753423
PMCID: PMC10732958
PMID: 38124967


245. Chaos Solitons Fractals. 2021 Oct;151:111250. doi: 10.1016/j.chaos.2021.111250. 
Epub 2021 Jul 10.

A new fuzzy fractal control approach of non-linear dynamic systems: The case of 
controlling the COVID-19 pandemics.

Castillo O(1), Melin P(1).

Author information:
(1)Tijuana Institute of Technology, Tijuana, Mexico.

This article is presenting a first attempt on a proposed fuzzy fractal control 
method for efficiently controlling nonlinear dynamic systems. The main goal is 
to combine the main advantages of fractal theoretical concepts and fuzzy logic 
theory for achieving efficient control of nonlinear dynamic systems. The concept 
coming from Fractal theory, known as the fractal dimension, can be utilized to 
measure the complexity of the dynamic behavior of a non-linear plant. On the 
other hand, fuzzy logic theory can be used to represent and capture the expert 
knowledge in controlling a plant. In addition, fuzzy logic enables to manage the 
uncertainty involved in the decision-making process for achieving efficient 
control of a non-linear plant. We illustrate the proposed fuzzy fractal control 
method with the current worldwide situation that requires achieving an efficient 
control of the COVID-19 pandemics.

© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chaos.2021.111250
PMCID: PMC9759419
PMID: 36568906


246. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2003;14(2):377-89. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2003.809424.

Neural-network predictive control for nonlinear dynamic systems with time-delay.

Huang JQ(1), Lewis FL.

Author information:
(1)Coll. of Energy and Power Eng., Nanjing Univ. of Aeronaut. and Astronaut., 
China.

A new recurrent neural-network predictive feedback control structure for a class 
of uncertain nonlinear dynamic time-delay systems in canonical form is developed 
and analyzed. The dynamic system has constant input and feedback time delays due 
to a communications channel. The proposed control structure consists of a 
linearized subsystem local to the controlled plant and a remote predictive 
controller located at the master command station. In the local linearized 
subsystem, a recurrent neural network with on-line weight tuning algorithm is 
employed to approximate the dynamics of the time-delay-free nonlinear plant. No 
linearity in the unknown parameters is required. No preliminary off-line weight 
learning is needed. The remote controller is a modified Smith predictor that 
provides prediction and maintains the desired tracking performance; an extra 
robustifying term is needed to guarantee stability. Rigorous stability proofs 
are given using Lyapunov analysis. The result is an adaptive neural net 
compensation scheme for unknown nonlinear systems with time delays. A simulation 
example is provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control 
strategy.

DOI: 10.1109/TNN.2003.809424
PMID: 18238020


247. ISA Trans. 2015 Apr 14:S0019-0578(15)00087-7. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2015.03.007. 
Online ahead of print.

WITHDRAWN: Numerical residuals in model based single fault detection and 
isolation of hybrid dynamic systems.

Mekki T(1), Triki S(2), Kamoun A(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit on Renewable Energies and Electric Vehicles (RELEV), Sfax 
Engineering School (ENIS), University of Sfax, Tunisia. Electronic address: 
taher.mekki@gmail.com.
(2)Research Unit on Renewable Energies and Electric Vehicles (RELEV), Sfax 
Engineering School (ENIS), University of Sfax, Tunisia. Electronic address: 
slim.triki@gmail.com.
(3)Research Unit on Renewable Energies and Electric Vehicles (RELEV), Sfax 
Engineering School (ENIS), University of Sfax, Tunisia. Electronic address: 
anas.kamoun@enis.rnu.tn.

This article has been withdrawn at the request of the author(s) and/or editor. 
The Publisher apologizes for any inconvenience this may cause. The full Elsevier 
Policy on Article Withdrawal can be found at 
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/withdrawalpolicy.

Copyright © 2015 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2015.03.007
PMID: 25882193


248. Front Psychol. 2017 May 3;8:667. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00667. eCollection 
2017.

Managing Contextual Complexity in an Experiential Learning Course: A Dynamic 
Systems Approach through the Identification of Turning Points in Students' 
Emotional Trajectories.

Nogueiras G(1), Kunnen ES(2), Iborra A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Sciences, University of AlcaláAlcalá de Henares, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of GroningenGroningen, 
Netherlands.

This study adopts a dynamic systems approach to investigate how individuals 
successfully manage contextual complexity. To that end, we tracked individuals' 
emotional trajectories during a challenging training course, seeking qualitative 
changes-turning points-and we tested their relationship with the perceived 
complexity of the training. The research context was a 5-day higher education 
course based on process-oriented experiential learning, and the sample consisted 
of 17 students. The students used a five-point Likert scale to rate the 
intensity of 16 emotions and the complexity of the training on 8 measurement 
points. Monte Carlo permutation tests enabled to identify 30 turning points in 
the 272 emotional trajectories analyzed (17 students * 16 emotions each). 83% of 
the turning points indicated a change of pattern in the emotional trajectories 
that consisted of: (a) increasingly intense positive emotions or (b) 
decreasingly intense negative emotions. These turning points also coincided with 
particularly complex periods in the training as perceived by the participants (p 
= 0.003, and p = 0.001 respectively). The relationship between 
positively-trended turning points in the students' emotional trajectories and 
the complexity of the training may be interpreted as evidence of a successful 
management of the cognitive conflict arising from the clash between the 
students' prior ways of meaning-making and the challenging demands of the 
training. One of the strengths of this study is that it provides a relatively 
simple procedure for identifying turning points in developmental trajectories, 
which can be applied to various longitudinal experiences that are very common in 
educational and developmental contexts. Additionally, the findings contribute to 
sustaining that the assumption that complex contextual demands lead unfailingly 
to individuals' learning is incomplete. Instead, it is how individuals manage 
complexity which may or may not lead to learning. Finally, this study can also 
be considered a first step in research on the developmental potential of 
process-oriented experiential learning training.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00667
PMCID: PMC5414386
PMID: 28515703


249. EURASIP J Bioinform Syst Biol. 2014;2014(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1687-4153-2014-5. 
Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Regularized EM algorithm for sparse parameter estimation in nonlinear dynamic 
systems with application to gene regulatory network inference.

Jia B(1), Wang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Intelligent Fusion Technology, Germantown, Inc., MD 20876, USA.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10027, USA.

Parameter estimation in dynamic systems finds applications in various 
disciplines, including system biology. The well-known expectation-maximization 
(EM) algorithm is a popular method and has been widely used to solve system 
identification and parameter estimation problems. However, the conventional EM 
algorithm cannot exploit the sparsity. On the other hand, in gene regulatory 
network inference problems, the parameters to be estimated often exhibit sparse 
structure. In this paper, a regularized expectation-maximization (rEM) algorithm 
for sparse parameter estimation in nonlinear dynamic systems is proposed that is 
based on the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation and can incorporate the 
sparse prior. The expectation step involves the forward Gaussian approximation 
filtering and the backward Gaussian approximation smoothing. The maximization 
step employs a re-weighted iterative thresholding method. The proposed algorithm 
is then applied to gene regulatory network inference. Results based on both 
synthetic and real data show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

DOI: 10.1186/1687-4153-2014-5
PMCID: PMC3998071
PMID: 24708632


250. J Proteome Res. 2005 Jul-Aug;4(4):1114-22. doi: 10.1021/pr050066z.

Building integrated approaches for the proteomics of complex, dynamic systems: 
NIH programs in technology and infrastructure development.

Sheeley DM(1), Breen JJ, Old SE.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Research Resources, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, The National Institutes of Health, 6701 Democracy 
Boulevard, MSC 4874, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. sheeleyd@mail.nih.gov

Proteomics technology and methods remain inadequate. Technological constraints 
contribute to an artificially static view of complex biological systems and a 
barrier between quantitative and interaction studies. Several NIH programs 
combine proteomics technology development with research on challenging 
biological problems to drive progress. A new initiative of the NIH Roadmap 
focuses on characterization of dynamic systems. The success of these programs 
will be judged by their impact on relevant biological problems.

DOI: 10.1021/pr050066z
PMID: 16083261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. ISA Trans. 2025 Jan;156:344-364. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.11.005. Epub 2024 
Nov 10.

Sequential fusion for multi-rate multi-sensor nonlinear dynamic systems with 
heavy-tailed noise and missing measurements.

Hu G(1), Zhang Z(2), Xu L(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Aerospace Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 
710126, China.
(2)The National and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Electrical Digital 
Design Technology, Wenzhou University, Zhejiang, Wenzhou 325000, China. 
Electronic address: zjzhang@wzu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Aerospace Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 
710126, China. Electronic address: Lpxu@mail.xidian.edu.cn.

This paper focuses on sequential fusion estimation for multi-rate multi-sensor 
nonlinear dynamic systems with heavy-tailed noise and missing measurements. On 
the basis of Bayesian inference, a sequential Student's t-based unscented Kalman 
filter (SSTUKF), together with its square-root form (SR-SSTUKF), is proposed by 
using the unscented transform to calculate Student's t weighted integrals. 
Considering the nonstationary measurement noise and/or accumulated computation 
error, adaptive factors are introduced by the t-test to suppress uncertainties. 
Additionally, the complexity computation and convergence analysis of the 
SR-SSTUKF are presented. The validity and robustness of the proposed sequential 
fusion method are illustrated by an example of agile target tracking. Simulation 
results indicate that the SR-SSTUKF with adaptive factors can further enhance 
accuracy and yield reliable estimations.

Copyright © 2024 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2024.11.005
PMID: 39572341

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that this work is 
original research that has not been published previously, and not under 
consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors 
have approved the manuscript that is enclosed.


252. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2007 Mar;18(2):466-81. doi: 10.1109/tnn.2006.885040.

A recurrent neural network for hierarchical control of interconnected dynamic 
systems.

Hou ZG(1), Gupta MM, Nikiforuk PN, Tan M, Cheng L.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Complex Systems and Intelligence Science, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China. 
hou@compsys.ia.ac.cn

A recurrent neural network for the optimal control of a group of interconnected 
dynamic systems is presented in this paper. On the basis of decomposition and 
coordination strategy for interconnected dynamic systems, the proposed neural 
network has a two-level hierarchical structure: several local optimization 
subnetworks at the lower level and one coordination subnetwork at the upper 
level. A goal-coordination method is used to coordinate the interactions between 
the subsystems. By nesting the dynamic equations of the subsystems into their 
corresponding local optimization subnetworks, the number of dimensions of the 
neural network can be reduced significantly. Furthermore, the subnetworks at 
both the lower and upper levels can work concurrently. Therefore, the 
computation efficiency, in comparison with the consecutive executions of 
numerical algorithms on digital computers, is increased dramatically. The 
proposed method is extended to the case where the control inputs of the 
subsystems are bounded. The stability analysis shows that the proposed neural 
network is asymptotically stable. Finally, an example is presented which 
demonstrates the satisfactory performance of the neural network.

DOI: 10.1109/tnn.2006.885040
PMID: 17385632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Front Psychol. 2021 Dec 17;12:735534. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.735534. 
eCollection 2021.

Trajectories of Idea Emergence in Dialogic Collaborative Problem Solving: Toward 
a Complex Dynamic Systems Perspective.

Hu L(1), Chen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.

According to the complex dynamic systems (CDS) perspective, learning emerges at 
various system levels. This study built a coherent theoretical framework based 
on CDS and Bakhtinian dialogic theory and further employed the concept of 
attractor (i.e., certain stable states that recur over time) in CDS theory to 
investigate the trajectories of idea emergence and how they diversified group 
outcomes in dialogic collaborative problem solving (D-CPS). Two contrasting 
groups were compared using visual and qualitative analysis approaches. The 
analysis based on idea tree diagrams showed that new ideas emergent in group 
discussion tended to attract local utterances and performed features of 
attractors in CDS in both high-performing and low-performing groups. The 
analysis based on idea hierarchy diagrams revealed how ideas emerged at various 
system levels. It was also found that status problems were likely to affect the 
functioning of regulative feedback loops, which might give rise to different 
structures of idea evolution. This study proposed CDS theory as an alternative 
perspective, augmented by the ethical considerations of Bakhtinian dialogism, 
for examining the dynamics of D-CPS.

Copyright © 2021 Hu and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.735534
PMCID: PMC8718646
PMID: 34975626

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


254. IET Syst Biol. 2007 Jan;1(1):2-9. doi: 10.1049/iet-syb:20050030.

Reduction of nonlinear dynamic systems with an application to signal 
transduction pathways.

Petrov V(1), Nikolova E, Wolkenhauer O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mechanics and Biomechanics, Acad. G. Bonchev Str., bl. 4, Sofia 
1113, Bulgaria.

Mathematical modelling of kinetic processes with different time scales allows a 
reduction of the governing equations using quasi-steady-state approximations 
(QSSA). A QSSA theorem is applied to a mathematical model of the influence that 
Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP) has on the ERK signalling pathway. On the 
basis of previously published parameter values, the system of 11 ordinary 
differential equations is rewritten in a form suitable for model reduction. In 
accordance with the terminology of the QSSA theorem, it is established that four 
of the protein and protein-complex concentrations are 'fast varying', such that 
the corresponding kinetic equations form an attached system. Another 
concentration is 'medium varying' such that the corresponding equation is 
reduced with respect to the four fast ones. The other six concentrations are 
'slow varying', which means the corresponding kinetic equations also present a 
reduced system with respect to the others. Analytical solutions, relating the 
steady-state values of the fast varying protein concentrations and the slow 
varying ones, are derived and interpreted as restrictions on the regulatory role 
of RKIP on ERK-pathway.

DOI: 10.1049/iet-syb:20050030
PMID: 17370424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Behav Brain Sci. 2025 Jan 31;48:e34. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X24000384.

Almost, but not quite there: Research into the emergence of higher-order 
motivated behavior should fully embrace the dynamic systems approach.

Gernigon C(1), Altamore R(1), Vallacher RR(2), van Geert PLC(3), Den Hartigh 
RJR(3).

Author information:
(1)EuroMov Digital Health in Motion, Université de Montpellier, IMT Mines Alès, 
Montpellier, 
France christophe.gernigon@umontpellier.fr remi.altamore@umontpellier.frhttps://www.researchgate.net/profile/Christophe-Gernigonhttps://fr.linkedin.com/in/r%C3%A9mi-altamore-6788111a8.
(2)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, 
USA vallacher@fau.eduhttps://psy.fau.edu/people/vallacher.php.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Groningen, TS, Groningen, The 
Netherlands p.l.c.van.geert@rug.nl j.r.den.hartigh@rug.nlhttps://www.paulvangeert.nlhttps://www.rug.nl/staff/j.r.den.hartigh.

Murayama and Jach rightfully aim to conceptualize motivation as an emergent 
property of a dynamic system of interacting elements. However, they do not 
embrace the ontological and paradigmatic constraints of the dynamic systems 
approach. They therefore miss the very process of emergence and how it can be 
formally modeled and tested by specific types of computer simulation.

DOI: 10.1017/S0140525X24000384
PMID: 39886878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. C R Biol. 2005 Sep;328(9):783-93. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2005.05.005.

Emergence of complex patterns induced by dynamic systems implemented in dynamic 
structures (DS)2.

[Article in English, French]

Rouault JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de neurobiologie de l'apprentissage, de la mémoire et de la 
communication, CNRS UMR 8620, université Paris-Sud, bât. 446, 91405 Orsay cedex, 
France. jacques.rouault@ibaic.u-psud.fr

We present the evolution of the simple system of Meinhardt implemented in both 
static or dynamic two-dimensional structures of almost-squared cells. In a 
static structure of 8 x 4=32 to 128 x 128=16384 cells, the pattern observed is 
periodic. An algorithm allows us to divide the cells following the greater size, 
and to define a dynamic structure. The implementation of the same Meinhardt 
system in this dynamic structure varying from 32 to 16 384 cells and a context 
of the same genotypic complexity for the model provides aperiodic patterns, with 
a higher phenotypic complexity than those observed in static structures, while 
the number of computations is comparable. We define that emergence occurs each 
time the ratio of phenotypic/genotypic complexities increases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crvi.2005.05.005
PMID: 16168359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Risk Anal. 2015 Jan;35(1):142-56. doi: 10.1111/risa.12251. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

A computational framework for prime implicants identification in noncoherent 
dynamic systems.

Di Maio F(1), Baronchelli S, Zio E.

Author information:
(1)Energy Department, Politecnico di Milano, Via Ponzio 34/3, 20133, Milano, 
Italy.

Dynamic reliability methods aim at complementing the capability of traditional 
static approaches (e.g., event trees [ETs] and fault trees [FTs]) by accounting 
for the system dynamic behavior and its interactions with the system state 
transition process. For this, the system dynamics is here described by a 
time-dependent model that includes the dependencies with the stochastic 
transition events. In this article, we present a novel computational framework 
for dynamic reliability analysis whose objectives are i) accounting for discrete 
stochastic transition events and ii) identifying the prime implicants (PIs) of 
the dynamic system. The framework entails adopting a multiple-valued logic (MVL) 
to consider stochastic transitions at discretized times. Then, PIs are 
originally identified by a differential evolution (DE) algorithm that looks for 
the optimal MVL solution of a covering problem formulated for MVL accident 
scenarios. For testing the feasibility of the framework, a dynamic noncoherent 
system composed of five components that can fail at discretized times has been 
analyzed, showing the applicability of the framework to practical cases.

© 2014 Society for Risk Analysis.

DOI: 10.1111/risa.12251
PMID: 25041408


258. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci. 2014 Jun 8;470(2166):20130743. doi: 
10.1098/rspa.2013.0743.

A frequency averaging framework for the solution of complex dynamic systems.

Lecomte C(1).

Author information:
(1)Associate Member, Southampton Statistical Sciences Research Institute , 
University of Southampton , Southampton, UK.

A frequency averaging framework is proposed for the solution of complex linear 
dynamic systems. It is remarkable that, while the mid-frequency region is 
usually very challenging, a smooth transition from low- through mid- and 
high-frequency ranges is possible and all ranges can now be considered in a 
single framework. An interpretation of the frequency averaging in the time 
domain is presented and it is explained that the average may be evaluated very 
efficiently in terms of system solutions.

DOI: 10.1098/rspa.2013.0743
PMCID: PMC4042715
PMID: 24910518


259. J Anim Sci. 2017 Oct;95(10):4533-4532. doi: 10.2527/jas2017.1653.

A deterministic, dynamic systems model of cow-calf production: The effects of 
breeding replacement heifers before mature cows over a 10-year horizon.

Shane DD, Larson RL, Sanderson MW, Miesner M, White BJ.

Some cattle production experts believe that cow-calf producers should breed 
replacement heifers (nulliparous cows) before cows (primiparous and multiparous 
cows), sometimes referred to as providing a heifer lead time (tHL). Our 
objective was to model the effects different durations of tHL may have on 
measures of herd productivity, including the percent of the herd cycling before 
the end of the first 21 d of the breeding season (%C21), the percent of the herd 
pregnant at pregnancy diagnosis (%PPD), the distribution of pregnancy by 21-d 
breeding intervals, the kilograms of calf weaned per cow exposed (KPC), and the 
replacement percentage (%RH), using a deterministic, dynamic systems model of 
cow-calf production over a 10-yr horizon. We also wished to examine differences 
in the effect of tHL related to the primiparous duration of postpartum anestrus 
(dPPA). The study model examined 6 different dPPA for primiparous cows (60, 70, 
80, 90, 100, or 110 d). The multiparous cow duration of postpartum anestrus was 
set to 60 d. The breeding season length for nulliparous cows was 63 d, as was 
the breeding season length for primiparous and multiparous cows. Nulliparous 
cows were modeled with a tHL of 0, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, or 42 d. Results are 
reported for the final breeding season of the 10-yr horizon. Increasing tHL 
resulted in a greater %C21 for the herd and for primiparous cows. Length of tHL 
had minimal impact on the %PPD unless the dPPA was 80 d or greater. For a dPPA 
of 110 d, a 0 d tHL resulted in the herd having 88.1 %PPD. When tHL was 21 d, 
the %PPD increased to 93.0%. The KPC was 161.2 kg when the dPPA was 110 d and 
tHL was 0 d and improved to 183.2 kg when tHL was increased to 42 d. The %RH did 
not vary much unless the dPPA was 90 d or greater, but increasing tHL resulted 
in decreased %RH. Based on the model results, increasing tHL improves the 
production outcomes included in the analysis, but herds with dPPA of 90 d or 
greater had the greatest degree of improvement. For these herds, approximately 
two-thirds of the improvement in outcomes by increasing tHL from 0 d to 42 d was 
realized when tHL was 21 d. Costs are likely incurred when implementing tHL in a 
breeding management program, and an ideal tHL likely depends on the dPPA of the 
herd, the expected improvement in productivity, and the costs associated with 
increasing tHL. Determining the dPPA of a herd could help veterinarians and 
producers develop optimal herd management strategies.

DOI: 10.2527/jas2017.1653
PMID: 29108056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):253-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00655.x.

An empirical validation of a dynamic systems model of interaction: do children 
of different sociometric statuses differ in their dyadic play?

Steenbeek H(1), van Geert P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands. 
h.w.steenbeek@rug.nl

Studying short-term dynamic processes and change mechanisms in interaction 
yields important knowledge that contributes to understanding long-term social 
development of children. In order to get a grip on this short-term dynamics of 
interaction processes, the authors made a dynamic systems model of dyadic 
interaction of children during one play session. The control parameters of the 
model relate to children's goal-directedness, concerns, emotional appraisals, 
social power, and social competence. Three groups of dyads of different 
sociometric statuses are represented by specific control parameter values. The 
model's order parameters consist of children's emotional expressions and other- 
versus self-directed actions. This article describes the empirical validation of 
the model and the methods needed for such validation. It focuses on the model's 
predictions of averages and distributions of the major variables, of the 
occurrence of attractors and power law distributions, and on the model's 
sensitivity. Overall, the model fits the empirical data well. In the discussion, 
we reflect on the developmental and methodological implications for explaining 
social interaction on the short-term as well as on the long-term time scale. In 
addition, implications for intervention and assessment are presented, in 
particular relating to the problem of rejection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00655.x
PMID: 18333981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. ISA Trans. 2015 Nov;59:363-74. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Oct 
9.

Neural networks for tracking of unknown SISO discrete-time nonlinear dynamic 
systems.

Aftab MS(1), Shafiq M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Sultan Qaboos University, 
Muscat, Oman. Electronic address: saleheen.aftab@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Sultan Qaboos University, 
Muscat, Oman. Electronic address: mshafiq@squ.edu.om.

This article presents a Lyapunov function based neural network tracking (LNT) 
strategy for single-input, single-output (SISO) discrete-time nonlinear dynamic 
systems. The proposed LNT architecture is composed of two feedforward neural 
networks operating as controller and estimator. A Lyapunov function based back 
propagation learning algorithm is used for online adjustment of the controller 
and estimator parameters. The controller and estimator error convergence and 
closed-loop system stability analysis is performed by Lyapunov stability theory. 
Moreover, two simulation examples and one real-time experiment are investigated 
as case studies. The achieved results successfully validate the controller 
performance.

Copyright © 2015 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2015.09.003
PMID: 26456201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. ISA Trans. 2025 Dec 15:S0019-0578(25)00713-X. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.12.020. 
Online ahead of print.

Multirate sampled data driven fast rate fault detection of dynamic systems.

Hu Y(1), Qiu A(2), Wang Y(3), Wang S(4).

Author information:
(1)Nantong University, School of Imformation Science and Technology, Nantong, 
226019, China. Electronic address: 2212310029@stmail.ntu.edu.cn.
(2)Nantong University, School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Nantong, 
226019, China. Electronic address: aibqiu@ntu.edu.cn.
(3)Nantong University, School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Nantong, 
226019, China. Electronic address: 2212310021@stmail.ntu.edu.cn.
(4)Nantong University, School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Nantong, 
226019, China. Electronic address: wsf@ntu.edu.cn.

Multirate sampled data (MRSD) dynamic systems are abundant in modern engineering 
systems. The inconsistent sampling rates cause data asynchrony and alter system 
properties, negatively impacting fault diagnosis with delayed and missed 
detections. In this paper, a fast rate fault detection scheme for dynamic 
systems is proposed, which is directly driven by MRSD. Firstly, the lifting 
technique is employed to transform asynchronous MRSD into single but slow rate 
sampled data. An auxiliary lifted output is constructed to compute a parity 
vector via subspace identification, facilitating a multi-dimensional diagnostic 
observer satisfying the Luenberger conditions. Then a post filter addresses 
causality constraint, allowing fast rate residual generation. Further, a fast 
rate residual evaluation scheme is developed. The effectiveness and superiority 
of the proposed scheme are demonstrated by a heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning (HVAC) example.

Copyright © 2025 International Society of Automation. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.12.020
PMID: 41421862

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


263. Biomimetics (Basel). 2026 Jan 12;11(1):65. doi: 10.3390/biomimetics11010065.

A Modified Artificial Protozoa Optimizer for Robust Parameter Identification in 
Nonlinear Dynamic Systems.

Izci D(1)(2), Ekinci S(3), Yüksek G(4), Rashdan M(5), Güneş BB(6), Güngör Mİ(1), 
Salman M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Bursa Uludag University, 
Bursa 16059, Turkey.
(2)Applied Science Research Center, Applied Science Private University, Amman 
11931, Jordan.
(3)Department of Computer Engineering, Bitlis Eren University, Bitlis 13100, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Batman University, 
Batman 72100, Turkey.
(5)College of Engineering and Technology, American University of the Middle 
East, Egaila 54200, Kuwait.
(6)Department of Computer Engineering, Istanbul Gedik University, İstanbul 
34876, Turkey.

Accurate parameter identification in nonlinear and chaotic dynamic systems 
requires optimization algorithms that can reliably balance global exploration 
and local refinement in complex, multimodal search landscapes. To address this 
challenge, a modified artificial protozoa optimizer (mAPO) is developed in this 
study by embedding two complementary mechanisms into the original artificial 
protozoa optimizer: a probabilistic random learning strategy to enhance 
population diversity and global search capability, and a Nelder-Mead 
simplex-based local refinement stage to improve exploitation and fine-scale 
solution adjustment. The general optimization performance and scalability of the 
proposed framework are first evaluated using the CEC2017 benchmark suite. 
Statistical analyses conducted over shifted and rotated, hybrid, and composition 
functions demonstrate that mAPO achieves improved mean performance and reduced 
variability compared with the original APO, indicating enhanced robustness in 
high-dimensional and complex optimization problems. The effectiveness of mAPO is 
then examined in nonlinear system identification applications involving chaotic 
dynamics. Offline and online parameter identification experiments are performed 
on the Rössler chaotic system and a permanent magnet synchronous motor, 
including scenarios with abrupt parameter variations. Comparative simulations 
against APO and several state-of-the-art optimizers show that mAPO consistently 
yields smaller objective function values, more accurate parameter estimates, and 
superior statistical stability. In the PMSM case, exact parameter reconstruction 
with zero error is achieved across all independent runs, while rapid and smooth 
convergence is observed under both static and time-varying conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/biomimetics11010065
PMCID: PMC12839244
PMID: 41589982

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


264. ISA Trans. 2018 Jan;72:205-217. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2017.10.012. Epub 2017 Oct 
31.

Nonlinear dynamic systems identification using recurrent interval type-2 TSK 
fuzzy neural network - A novel structure.

El-Nagar AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Industrial Electronics and Control Engineering, Faculty of 
Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menof 32852, Egypt. Electronic 
address: ahmed.elnagar@el-eng.menofia.edu.eg.

In this study, a novel structure of a recurrent interval type-2 
Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) fuzzy neural network (FNN) is introduced for nonlinear 
dynamic and time-varying systems identification. It combines the type-2 fuzzy 
sets (T2FSs) and a recurrent FNN to avoid the data uncertainties. The fuzzy 
firing strengths in the proposed structure are returned to the network input as 
internal variables. The interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2FSs) is used to describe 
the antecedent part for each rule while the consequent part is a TSK-type, which 
is a linear function of the internal variables and the external inputs with 
interval weights. All the type-2 fuzzy rules for the proposed RIT2TSKFNN are 
learned on-line based on structure and parameter learning, which are performed 
using the type-2 fuzzy clustering. The antecedent and consequent parameters of 
the proposed RIT2TSKFNN are updated based on the Lyapunov function to achieve 
network stability. The obtained results indicate that our proposed network has a 
small root mean square error (RMSE) and a small integral of square error (ISE) 
with a small number of rules and a small computation time compared with other 
type-2 FNNs.

Copyright © 2017 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2017.10.012
PMID: 29096993


265. Chaos. 2015 Apr;25(4):043111. doi: 10.1063/1.4917550.

Numerical analysis for finite-range multitype stochastic contact financial 
market dynamic systems.

Yang G(1), Wang J(1), Fang W(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China.
(2)School of Economics and Management, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 
100044, China.

In an attempt to reproduce and study the dynamics of financial markets, a random 
agent-based financial price model is developed and investigated by the 
finite-range multitype contact dynamic system, in which the interaction and 
dispersal of different types of investment attitudes in a stock market are 
imitated by viruses spreading. With different parameters of birth rates and 
finite-range, the normalized return series are simulated by Monte Carlo 
simulation method and numerical studied by power-law distribution analysis and 
autocorrelation analysis. To better understand the nonlinear dynamics of the 
return series, a q-order autocorrelation function and a multi-autocorrelation 
function are also defined in this work. The comparisons of statistical behaviors 
of return series from the agent-based model and the daily historical market 
returns of Shanghai Composite Index and Shenzhen Component Index indicate that 
the proposed model is a reasonable qualitative explanation for the price 
formation process of stock market systems.

DOI: 10.1063/1.4917550
PMID: 25933659


266. Sci Rep. 2026 Jan 6;16(1):2585. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-32436-6.

Robust performance optimization of UAV dynamic systems using MPC-PID hybrid 
control.

Zhou W(1), Zhou L(1), Yuan T(1), Chen R(2), Liu D(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Mechanical Engineering, Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 
224051, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Jiangsu Topower Tyre Co., Ltd, Yancheng, 224404, Jiangsu, China.
(3)School of Mechanical Engineering, Yancheng Institute of Technology, Yancheng, 
224051, Jiangsu, China. liudakun_ycit@163.com.

This paper intends to address the challenges of insufficient robustness and 
model uncertainty compensation in unmanned aerial vehicle dynamic systems under 
complex disturbances. The paper proposes a hybrid control architecture that 
combines deep fusion model predictive control with adaptive 
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) based on Transformer attention mechanism. 
The core innovation of this architecture lies in introducing attention neural 
networks to dynamically tune PID gains online, and forming a deep collaborative 
control framework of "prediction-learning-compensation" with Model Predictive 
Control (MPC) and sliding mode disturbance observer with H∞ (H-infinity) robust 
optimization. This thereby improvs the adaptability and control accuracy of the 
system under unstructured disturbances and model mismatches. The control 
architecture employs a robustly optimized upper-layer MPC controller, which, 
based on the receding horizon principle, utilizes real-time system state updates 
to predict future state evolution. An H∞ performance criterion is incorporated 
into the control sequence optimization to strengthen robustness against model 
parameter perturbations and external disturbances. The lower-layer controller 
adopts an adaptive PID structure that responds quickly to the reference signals 
generated by the MPC. To address the degradation of PID tuning performance under 
dynamic mismatches and unmodeled disturbances, an attention mechanism neural 
network based on the Transformer architecture is introduced to adjust the PID 
gains online and capture nonlinear dynamic variations. Additionally, in order to 
further enhance system stability under severe disturbances, this control 
framework integrates sliding mode control technology into the disturbance 
observer design, and constructs a sliding mode disturbance observer module for 
explicit estimation of external disturbances and model uncertainties. The 
estimated values are injected into the lower-level adaptive PID controller 
through a feedforward compensation mechanism to achieve active disturbance 
rejection. Simulation experiments conducted in a nonlinear disturbance 
environment built on the AirSim platform, as well as tests using the EuRoc 
dataset, demonstrate that the proposed method maintains a steady-state tracking 
error within 5% during path-following tasks. Compared with the traditional MPC 
combined with fixed gain PID control, this method improves the steady-state 
robustness by about 17%, and shortens the system adjustment time from 3.15 s to 
2.47 s, significantly improving by 21.6%, demonstrating excellent convergence 
and anti-interference ability. The results indicate that the MPC-PID hybrid 
control approach offers significant advantages in enhancing the robustness, 
adaptability, and control accuracy of UAV systems, making it well-suited for 
intelligent control demands in complex flight missions.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-32436-6
PMCID: PMC12820076
PMID: 41495139

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.


267. Math Biosci. 2018 Jun;300:122-129. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2018.03.009. Epub 2018 Mar 
8.

On structural identifiability analysis of the cascaded linear dynamic systems in 
isotopically non-stationary 13C labelling experiments.

Lin W(1), Wang Z(2), Huang M(2), Zhuang Y(2), Zhang S(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of 
Science Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, PR China. Electronic 
address: wllin@ecust.edu.cn.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of 
Science Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, PR China.

The isotopically non-stationary 13C labelling experiments, as an emerging 
experimental technique, can estimate the intracellular fluxes of the cell 
culture under an isotopic transient period. However, to the best of our 
knowledge, the issue of the structural identifiability analysis of 
non-stationary isotope experiments is not well addressed in the literature. In 
this work, the local structural identifiability analysis for non-stationary 
cumomer balance equations is conducted based on the Taylor series approach. The 
numerical rank of the Jacobian matrices of the finite extended time derivatives 
of the measured fractions with respect to the free parameters is taken as the 
criterion. It turns out that only one single time point is necessary to achieve 
the structural identifiability analysis of the cascaded linear dynamic system of 
non-stationary isotope experiments. The equivalence between the local structural 
identifiability of the cascaded linear dynamic systems and the local optimum 
condition of the nonlinear least squares problem is elucidated in the work. 
Optimal measurements sets can then be determined for the metabolic network. Two 
simulated metabolic networks are adopted to demonstrate the utility of the 
proposed method.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2018.03.009
PMID: 29526552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. ISA Trans. 2020 Mar;98:292-308. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.08.032. Epub 2019 Aug 
26.

Externally Recurrent Neural Network based identification of dynamic systems 
using Lyapunov stability analysis.

Kumar R(1), Srivastava S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering, Thapar Institute of 
Engineering and Technology (Deemed to be University), Patiala 147004, India. 
Electronic address: rajesh.kumar23@thapar.edu.
(2)Division of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, Netaji Subhas University 
of Technology (formerly Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology), Sector 3, 
Dwarka, New Delhi 110078, India. Electronic address: smriti.nsit@gmail.com.

This paper proposes an Externally Recurrent Neural Network (ERNN) for 
approximating the unknown dynamics of complex nonlinear systems and time series 
prediction. The proposed model utilizes the present as well as delayed values of 
the system outputs as well as of the external input. The weight update equations 
are tested for their boundedness by applying the Lyapunov stability method. 
Further, the error convergence proof is also given. The proposed model is put to 
test by considering various nonlinear examples and its performance is also 
compared with other state of the art methods. The results obtained in the 
present study indicate that the method is efficient and has provided accurate 
results.

Copyright © 2019 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2019.08.032
PMID: 31472936

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


269. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e49804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049804. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Resilience to leaking--dynamic systems modeling of information security.

Hamacher K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. 
hamacher@bio.tu-darmstadt.de

Leaking of confidential material is a major threat to information security 
within organizations and to society as a whole. This insight has gained traction 
in the political realm since the activities of Wikileaks, which hopes to attack 
'unjust' systems or 'conspiracies'. Eventually, such threats to information 
security rely on a biologistic argument on the benefits and drawbacks that 
uncontrolled leaking might pose for 'just' and 'unjust' entities. Such 
biological metaphors are almost exclusively based on the economic advantage of 
participants. Here, I introduce a mathematical model of the complex dynamics 
implied by leaking. The complex interactions of adversaries are modeled by 
coupled logistic equations including network effects of econo-communication 
networks. The modeling shows, that there might arise situations where the 
leaking envisioned and encouraged by Wikileaks and the like can strengthen the 
defending entity (the 'conspiracy'). In particular, the only severe impact 
leaking can have on an organization seems to originate in the exploitation of 
leaks by another entity the organization competes with. Therefore, the model 
suggests that leaks can be used as a `tactical mean' in direct adversary 
relations, but do not necessarily increase public benefit and societal 
immunization to 'conspiracies'. Furthermore, within the model the exploitation 
of the (open) competition between entities seems to be a more promising approach 
to control malicious organizations : divide-et-impera policies triumph here.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049804
PMCID: PMC3515608
PMID: 23227151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.


270. Neural Comput. 2008 Jul;20(7):1821-46. doi: 10.1162/neco.2008.04-07-506.

Fast recursive filters for simulating nonlinear dynamic systems.

van Hateren JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, Amsterdam, and Institute for Mathematics and Computing Science, 
University of Groningen, The Netherlands. j.h.van.hateren@rug.nl

A fast and accurate computational scheme for simulating nonlinear dynamic 
systems is presented. The scheme assumes that the system can be represented by a 
combination of components of only two different types: first-order low-pass 
filters and static nonlinearities. The parameters of these filters and 
nonlinearities may depend on system variables, and the topology of the system 
may be complex, including feedback. Several examples taken from neuroscience are 
given: phototransduction, photopigment bleaching, and spike generation according 
to the Hodgkin-Huxley equations. The scheme uses two slightly different forms of 
autoregressive filters, with an implicit delay of zero for feedforward control 
and an implicit delay of half a sample distance for feedback control. On a 
fairly complex model of the macaque retinal horizontal cell, it computes, for a 
given level of accuracy, one to two orders of magnitude faster than the 
fourth-order Runge-Kutta. The computational scheme has minimal memory 
requirements and is also suited for computation on a stream processor, such as a 
graphical processing unit.

DOI: 10.1162/neco.2008.04-07-506
PMID: 18254700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Infant Behav Dev. 2013 Jun;36(3):432-7. doi: 10.1016/j.infbeh.2013.03.013. Epub 
2013 Apr 30.

Dyadic flexibility during the face-to-face still-face paradigm: a dynamic 
systems analysis of its temporal organization.

Sravish AV(1), Tronick E, Hollenstein T, Beeghly M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts, Boston, MA, USA. 
akhila.sravish@umb.edu

A dynamic systems analytical model was used to characterize infant-caregiver 
regulatory dynamics. Though stable, there was an increase in dyadic flexibility 
following a perturbation. Dyadic flexibility was positively related to infant 
negativity during the perturbation. Findings were qualified by infant sex and 
maternal depressive symptoms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.infbeh.2013.03.013
PMID: 23639334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Child Dev. 2001 Sep-Oct;72(5):1327-46. doi: 10.1111/1467-8624.00351.

Tests of a dynamic systems account of the A-not-B error: the influence of prior 
experience on the spatial memory abilities of two-year-olds.

Spencer JP(1), Smith LB, Thelen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA. 
john-spencer@uiowa.edu

Recently, Smith, Thelen, and colleagues proposed a dynamic systems account of 
the Piagetian "A-not-B" error in which infants' errors result from general 
processes that make goal-directed actions to remembered locations. Based on this 
account, the A-not-B error should be a general phenomenon, observable in 
different tasks and at different points in development. Smith, Thelen, et al.'s 
proposal was tested using an A-not-B version of a sandbox task. During three 
training trials and three "A" trials, 2-year-olds watched as a toy was buried in 
a sandbox at Location A. Following a 10-s delay, children searched for the 
object. Across five experiments, children's (total N = 92) performance on the A 
trials was accurate. After the A trials, children watched as a toy was hidden at 
Location B, 8 to 10 inches from Location A. In all experiments, children's 
searches after a 10-s delay were significantly biased in the direction of 
Location A. Furthermore, this bias toward Location A decreased with repeated 
trials to Location B, as well as when children completed fewer trials to 
Location A. Together, these data suggest that A-not-B-type errors are pervasive 
across tasks and development.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-8624.00351
PMID: 11699674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. ISA Trans. 2014 Jan;53(1):33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2013.08.012. Epub 2013 
Sep 20.

Recurrent fuzzy neural network backstepping control for the prescribed output 
tracking performance of nonlinear dynamic systems.

Han SI(1), Lee JM(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Jangjeon-dong, 
Geumjeong-gu, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering, Pusan National University, Jangjeon-dong, 
Geumjeong-gu, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
jmlee@pusan.ac.kr.

This paper proposes a backstepping control system that uses a tracking error 
constraint and recurrent fuzzy neural networks (RFNNs) to achieve a prescribed 
tracking performance for a strict-feedback nonlinear dynamic system. A new 
constraint variable was defined to generate the virtual control that forces the 
tracking error to fall within prescribed boundaries. An adaptive RFNN was also 
used to obtain the required improvement on the approximation performances in 
order to avoid calculating the explosive number of terms generated by the 
recursive steps of traditional backstepping control. The boundedness and 
convergence of the closed-loop system was confirmed based on the Lyapunov 
stability theory. The prescribed performance of the proposed control scheme was 
validated by using it to control the prescribed error of a nonlinear system and 
a robot manipulator.

© 2013 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2013.08.012
PMID: 24055100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Am J Bot. 2019 Apr;106(4):517-519. doi: 10.1002/ajb2.1269. Epub 2019 Apr 9.

Placing human landscape legacies in a dynamic systems framework.

Ross NJ(1), Stevens MHH(2).

Author information:
(1)Drake University, 2507 University Avenue, Des Moines, IA, 50311, USA.
(2)Miami University, 700 E. High Street, Oxford, OH, 45056, USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ajb2.1269
PMID: 30965385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2012 Nov;108(2):750-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2012.04.010. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Numerical framework to model temporally resolved multi-stage dynamic systems.

Zakharov MN(1), Bhasin S, Szafran AT, Mancini MA, Jasuja R.

Author information:
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Boston University School 
of Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Numerical modeling of steroid hormone signaling presents an exciting challenge 
involving spatiotemporal coordination of multiple events. Ligand binding in 
cytoplasm triggers dissociation and/or association of coregulators which 
subsequently regulate DNA binding and transcriptional activity in nucleus. In 
order to develop a comprehensive multi-stage model, it is imperative to follow 
not only the transcriptional outcomes but also the intermediate protein 
complexes. Accordingly, we developed a software toolkit for simulating complex 
biochemical pathways as a set of non-linear differential equations in LabVIEW 
(Laboratory Virtual Instrumentation and Engineering Workbench, National 
Instruments, Austin, TX) environment. The toolkit is visual, highly modular, 
loosely coupled with the rest of LabVIEW, scalable and extensible. The toolkit 
can be used to develop and validate biochemical models and estimate model 
parameters from existing experimental data. We illustrate the application of the 
toolkit for simulation of steroid hormone response in cells, and demonstrate how 
the toolkit can be employed for other biological and chemical systems as well. 
The software module presented here can be used stand-alone as well as built into 
data collection and analysis applications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2012.04.010
PMID: 22727632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Zhejiang Univ Sci. 2003 Jan-Feb;4(1):58-63. doi: 10.1631/jzus.2003.0058.

Adaptive terminal sliding mode control for high-order nonlinear dynamic systems.

Zhuang KY(1), Su HY, Zhang KQ, Chu J.

Author information:
(1)National Lab. of Industrial Control Technology, Institute of Advanced Process 
Control, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.

An adaptive terminal sliding mode control (SMC) technique is proposed to deal 
with the tracking problem for a class of high-order nonlinear dynamic systems. 
It is shown that a function augmented sliding hyperplane can be used to develop 
a new terminal sliding mode for high-order nonlinear systems. A terminal SMC 
controller based on Lyapunov theory is designed to force the state variables of 
the closed-loop system to reach and remain on the terminal sliding mode, so that 
the output tracking error then converges to zero in finite time which can be set 
arbitrarily. An adaptive mechanism is introduced to estimate the unknown 
parameters of the upper bounds of system uncertainties. The estimates are then 
used as controller parameters so that the effects of uncertain dynamics can be 
eliminated. It is also shown that the stability of the closed-loop system can be 
guaranteed with the proposed control strategy. The simulation of a numerical 
example is provided to show the effectiveness of the new method.

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.2003.0058
PMID: 12656344


277. Biomed Tech (Berl). 2012 Sep 6;57 Suppl 
1:/j/bmte.2012.57.issue-s1-N/bmt-2012-4192/bmt-2012-4192.xml. doi: 
10.1515/bmt-2012-4192.

Connecting workflow management to the OR network: Design and evaluation of a 
bridge to enable dynamic systems behaviour.

Franke S, Liebmann P, Neumuth T.

DOI: 10.1515/bmt-2012-4192
PMID: 23096285


278. Rev Fac Cien Med Univ Nac Cordoba. 2017 Dec 21;74(4):313-319. doi: 
10.31053/1853.0605.v74.n4.16308.

[Evaluation in 18 hours of Cardiac Dynamics with the Mathematical Law of Dynamic 
Systems].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Prieto Bohórquez SE(1), Rodríguez Velásquez JO, Correa Herrera C, Pardo Oviedo 
JM, Ardila J.

Author information:
(1). esperanzapri@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: an exponential law has been found for chaotic dynamic cardiac 
systems, making it possible to quantify the differences between normal and 
pathological cardiac dynamics.
METHODOLOGY: 120 electrocardiographic records were analyzed, 40 corresponded to 
subjects within the limits of normality and 80 with different pathologies. For 
each holter the attractors generated with the data during 18 hours and 
throughout the dynamics were analyzed. The fractal dimension of the attractor 
and its spatial occupation were calculated. To these measures was applied the 
diagnosis mathematical evaluation previously developed, comparing the evaluation 
for 18 hours and for the whole registry; sensitivity, specificity and Kappa 
coefficient were finally calculated.
RESULTS: For the normal dynamics, the occupancy spaces in the Kp grid were 
between 200 and 381 for the evaluation of the whole holter, and between 201 and 
384 in the evaluation during 18 hours, showing the closeness in the 
measurements, which allows that the decrease in the time of the evaluation is 
consistent, this same proximity was observed for the diseased and acute 
dynamics.
CONCLUSION: It was evidenced the clinical applicability in 18 hours of the 
exponential law in the chaotic cardiac dynamics associated with arrhythmias 
showing to be useful for the prediction of the evolution towards acute states of 
the dynamics

Publisher: INTRODUCCIÓN: una ley exponencial se ha hallado para los sistemas 
dinámicos caóticos cardiacos, logrando cuantificar las diferencias entre 
dinámicas cardiacas normales y patológicas.
METODOLOGÍA: Se analizaron 120 registros electrocardiográficos, 40 correspondían 
a sujetos dentro de los límites de normalidad y 80 con diferentes patologías. 
Para cada holter se analizaron los atractores generados con los datos durante 18 
horas y durante toda la dinámica. Se calculó la dimensión fractal del atractor y 
su ocupación espacial. A estas medidas se aplicó la evaluación matemática 
diagnostica desarrollada previamente, comparando la evaluación para 18 horas y 
para todo el registro; finalmente se calculó la sensibilidad, especificidad y 
coeficiente Kappa.
RESULTADOS: Para las dinámicas normales los espacios de ocupación en la rejilla 
Kp estuvieron entre 200 y 381 en la evaluación de la totalidad del holter, y 
entre 201 y 384 en la evaluación durante 18 horas, mostrando la cercanía en las 
medidas, lo que permite que la disminución en el tiempo de la evaluación sea 
consistente, esta misma cercanía se observó para las dinámicas enfermas y 
agudas.
CONCLUSIÓN: Se evidenció la aplicabilidad clínica en 18 horas de la ley 
exponencial en la dinámica cardiaca caótica asociada a arritmias mostrando ser 
de utilidad para la predicción de la evolución hacia estados agudos de la 
dinámica.

DOI: 10.31053/1853.0605.v74.n4.16308
PMID: 29902136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. ISA Trans. 2004 Jul;43(3):459-75. doi: 10.1016/s0019-0578(07)60161-x.

Model-based fault diagnosis in continuous dynamic systems.

Lo CH(1), Wong YK, Rad AB.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Electrical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung 
Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong. eechlo@polyu.edu.hk

Traditional fault detection and isolation methods are based on quantitative 
models which are sometimes difficult and costly to obtain. In this paper, 
qualitative bond graph (QBG) reasoning is adopted as the modeling scheme to 
generate a set of qualitative equations. The QBG method provides a unified 
approach for modeling engineering systems, in particular, mechatronic systems. 
An input-output qualitative equation derived from QBG formalism performs 
continuous system monitoring. Fault diagnosis is activated when a discrepancy is 
observed between measured abnormal behavior and predicted system behavior. 
Genetic algorithms (GA's) are then used to search for possible faulty components 
among a system of qualitative equations. In order to demonstrate the performance 
of the proposed algorithm, we have tested it on a laboratory scale servo-tank 
liquid process rig. Results of the proposed model-based fault detection and 
diagnosis algorithm for the process rig are presented and discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0019-0578(07)60161-x
PMID: 15272799


280. Chaos. 2025 Oct 1;35(10):103147. doi: 10.1063/5.0274465.

Causal discovery in symmetric dynamic systems with convergent cross mapping.

Duan Y(1), Guo Y(1), Yang J(2), Yin M(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer, Data and Mathematical Sciences, Western Sydney 
University, Parramatta, NSW 2150, Australia.
(2)School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, 
Wollongong 2500, Australia.
(3)School of Semiconductor Science and Technology, South China Normal 
University, Guangzhou 510631, China.

This paper systematically discusses how the inherent properties of chaotic 
attractors influence the results of discovering causal relationships from time 
series using convergent cross mapping, particularly how convergent cross mapping 
misleads the bidirectional causal relationship as unidirectional when the 
chaotic attractor exhibits symmetry. We propose a novel method based on the 
k-means clustering method to address the challenges when the measurement 
function defines even parity, which may cause this issue. This method is 
demonstrated to recover the symmetry of the latent chaotic attractor and 
discover the correct causal links between time series without introducing 
information from other variables. We validate the accuracy of this method using 
time series derived from numerical simulations and a real-world system for which 
convergent cross mapping may conclude erroneous results.

© 2025 Author(s). All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed 
under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.1063/5.0274465
PMID: 41159857


281. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2026 Mar;263:106384. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2026.106384. 
Epub 2026 Feb 4.

'Why I left the county': Exploring EFL teachers' emotional labour trajectories 
through complex dynamic systems theory.

Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)Basic Science Division, Jilin Jianzhu University, No.5088, XinCheng Street, 
Nanguan District, Changchun City, Jilin Province, China. Electronic address: 
lihanqian@jlju.edu.cn.

English as a foreign language (EFL) teachers working in rural areas encounter 
various emotional impediments, and the failure to effectively regulate these 
emotions may ultimately result in attrition. In light of the 'complexity turn' 
in affect research, the present study adopts complex dynamic systems theory to 
trace the emotional labour trajectories of two senior high school EFL teachers 
during their initial employment in rural China. An analysis of retrospective 
interviews, narrative frames and researcher field notes revealed that critical 
incidents (CIs) acted as perturbations, propelling the participants out of 
stability and redirecting their emotional labour trajectories along alternative 
paths. Four categories of CIs were identified: dissatisfaction with the rural 
environment, challenges in EFL teaching, difficulties in managing interpersonal 
relationships and limited opportunities for professional advancement. Turnover 
intention emerged through a cumulative process as the participants negotiated 
emotional labour, with CIs acting as significant catalysts. The findings 
underscore the urgent need for enhanced support mechanisms for rural teachers.

Copyright © 2026 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2026.106384
PMID: 41643337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author 
declares no conflict of interest.


282. Front Psychol. 2012 Jul 25;3:253. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00253. eCollection 
2012.

Time dependency of psychotherapeutic exchanges: the contribution of the theory 
of dynamic systems in analyzing process.

Salvatore S(1), Tschacher W.

Author information:
(1)University of Salento Lecce, Italy.

This paper provides a general framework for the use of Theory of Dynamic Systems 
(TDS) in the field of psychotherapy research. Psychotherapy is inherently 
dynamic, namely a function of time. Consequently, the improvement of construct 
validity and clinical relevance of psychotherapy process research require the 
development of models of investigation allowing dynamic mappings of clinical 
exchange. Thus, TDS becomes a significant theoretical and methodological 
reference. The paper focuses two topics. First, the main concepts of TDS are 
briefly introduced together with a basic typology of approaches developed within 
this domain. Second, we propose a repertoire of investigation strategies that 
can be used to capture the dynamic nature of clinical exchange. In this way we 
intend to highlight the feasibility and utility of strategies of analysis 
informed by TDS.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00253
PMCID: PMC3404413
PMID: 22848205


283. ISA Trans. 2025 Dec 22:S0019-0578(25)00722-0. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.12.030. 
Online ahead of print.

A distributed alternating optimization approach to canonical correlation 
analysis based fault detection for dynamic systems.

Wang C(1), Zhao Z(2), Li L(3), Zhong M(4), Sun C(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and 
Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. Electronic address: 
w1804576313@163.com.
(2)School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and 
Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China. Electronic address: 
zhaozhenjinxs@163.com.
(3)School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and 
Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China; State Key Laboratory of Industrial 
Control Technology, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 
200237, China. Electronic address: linlin.li@uni-due.de.
(4)College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Shandong University of 
Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, China. Electronic address: 
myzhong@sdust.edu.cn.
(5)College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Shandong University of 
Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, China. Electronic address: 
sun2007cn@163.com.

In this paper, a data-driven distributed alternating optimization approach to 
optimal fault detection is proposed for dynamic processes based on canonical 
correlation analysis (CCA). The focus of this method is to reduce the 
uncertainties caused by measurement noise using relevant information from the 
neighboring subsystems. Specifically, the average consensus algorithm is used in 
the alternating optimization algorithm to calculate the CCA parameters, thereby 
enabling each subsystem to update the parameters simultaneously. Then, a 
distributed residual generator can be constructed using the obtained CCA 
parameters for the fault detection purposes. Compared with the centralized 
methods, the communication cost between nodes is reduced and the computation 
efficiency is improved by the proposed distributed approach. Based on it, case 
studies on the hot rolling mill process and Tennessee Eastman process are used 
to demonstrate the proposed method.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.12.030
PMID: 41455635

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


284. ISA Trans. 2016 Jul;63:182-195. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2016.04.014. Epub 2016 May 
10.

Data-driven output-feedback fault-tolerant L2 control of unknown dynamic 
systems.

Wang JS(1), Yang GH(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, 
Shenyang, Liaoning 110819, PR China; State Key Laboratory of Synthetical 
Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern University, Shenyang, Liaoning 
110819, PR China. Electronic address: wangjs82@126.com.
(2)College of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, 
Shenyang, Liaoning 110819, PR China; State Key Laboratory of Synthetical 
Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern University, Shenyang, Liaoning 
110819, PR China. Electronic address: yangguanghong@ise.neu.edu.cn.

This paper studies the data-driven output-feedback fault-tolerant L2-control 
problem for unknown dynamic systems. In a framework of active fault-tolerant 
control (FTC), three issues are addressed, including fault detection, controller 
reconfiguration for optimal guaranteed cost control, and tracking control. 
According to the data-driven form of observer-based residual generators, the 
system state is expressed in the form of the measured input-output data. On this 
basis, a model-free approach to L2 control of unknown linear time-invariant 
(LTI) discrete-time plants is given. To achieve tracking control, a design 
method for a pre-filter is also presented. With the aid of the aforementioned 
results and the input-output data-based time-varying value function 
approximation structure, a data-driven FTC scheme ensuring L2-gain properties is 
developed. To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology, two 
simulation examples are employed.

Copyright © 2016 ISA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isatra.2016.04.014
PMID: 27178710


285. Entropy (Basel). 2018 Oct 15;20(10):790. doi: 10.3390/e20100790.

Maximum Entropy Probability Density Principle in Probabilistic Investigations of 
Dynamic Systems.

Náprstek J(1), Fischer C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Prosecká 809/76, 190 00 
Prague 9, Czech Republic.

In this study, we consider a method for investigating the stochastic response of 
a nonlinear dynamical system affected by a random seismic process. We present 
the solution of the probability density of a single/multiple-degree of freedom 
(SDOF/MDOF) system with several statically stable equilibrium states and with 
possible jumps of the snap-through type. The system is a Hamiltonian system with 
weak damping excited by a system of non-stationary Gaussian white noise. The 
solution based on the Gibbs principle of the maximum entropy of probability 
could potentially be implemented in various branches of engineering. The search 
for the extreme of the Gibbs entropy functional is formulated as a constrained 
optimization problem. The secondary constraints follow from the Fokker-Planck 
equation (FPE) for the system considered or from the system of ordinary 
differential equations for the stochastic moments of the response derived from 
the relevant FPE. In terms of the application type, this strategy is most 
suitable for SDOF/MDOF systems containing polynomial type nonlinearities. Thus, 
the solution links up with the customary formulation of the finite elements 
discretization for strongly nonlinear continuous systems.

DOI: 10.3390/e20100790
PMCID: PMC7512353
PMID: 33265878

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


286. ISA Trans. 2005 Oct;44(4):515-38. doi: 10.1016/s0019-0578(07)60058-5.

Additive fault detection in nonlinear dynamic systems with saturation.

Blázquez LF(1), de Miguel LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of León, 
Campus de Vegazana, León, Spain. diefbq@unileon.es

This paper describes the effects of input saturation on the performance of a 
model-based fault detection method based on the input-output parity equation 
approach. For this purpose, the level control of a chemical reactor has been 
chosen as the control process to be analyzed, where the saturation of the 
dynamic process is due to the inflow control valve, and only additive faults 
have been considered. This study has been carried out in two ways: first by 
simulation techniques and second on a real industrial system. In the simulated 
case, the decrease in the fault detectability due to the saturation effects is 
shown, and some ways of achieving higher fault detectability are explored. The 
results obtained in the industrial case complement those obtained in the 
simulated case, and also reveal the existence of a relation between the control 
strategy used in the process and additive fault detectability, in the sense that 
increases in fault detectability are obtained due to the use of faster control 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0019-0578(07)60058-5
PMID: 16294778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2009 Dec;39(6):1516-27. doi: 
10.1109/TSMCB.2009.2020295. Epub 2009 May 26.

A new approach to guaranteed cost control of T-s fuzzy dynamic systems with 
interval parameter uncertainties.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang C, Gao H.

Author information:
(1)Space Control and Inertial Technology Research Center, Harbin Institute of 
Technology, Harbin, China. zhaoresponsible@gmail.com

This paper investigates the problem of guaranteed cost control for Takagi-Sugeno 
fuzzy dynamic systems with interval parameter uncertainties. The parameter 
uncertainty is characterized by the matrix bound, which is quite natural in real 
applications. Attention is focused on the fuzzy state feedback controller design 
via the so-called parallel distributed compensation scheme, which guarantees the 
closed-loop system to be robustly stable with a prescribed upper bound of the 
cost function. By utilizing the instrumental idea of delay dividing, a new 
Lyapunov-Krasovskii functional is introduced, which leads the resultant 
conditions to be much less conservative than most existing results in the 
literature. Some other new ideas such as basis dependence are also employed, 
which help to reduce the conservatism. All the results are formulated in the 
form of linear matrix inequalities (LMIs), which can readily be solved via 
standard numerical software. Finally, illustrative examples are given to show 
the less conservatism and applicability of the obtained results.

DOI: 10.1109/TSMCB.2009.2020295
PMID: 19473945


288. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2013 Oct;24(10):1635-47. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2013.2258356.

SVR learning-based spatiotemporal fuzzy logic controller for nonlinear spatially 
distributed dynamic systems.

Zhang XX, Jiang Y, Li HX, Li SY.

A data-driven 3-D fuzzy-logic controller (3-D FLC) design methodology based on 
support vector regression (SVR) learning is developed for nonlinear spatially 
distributed dynamic systems. Initially, the spatial information expression and 
processing as well as the fuzzy linguistic expression and rule inference of a 
3-D FLC are integrated into spatial fuzzy basis functions (SFBFs), and then the 
3-D FLC can be depicted by a three-layer network structure. By relating SFBFs of 
the 3-D FLC directly to spatial kernel functions of an SVR, an equivalence 
relationship of the 3-D FLC and the SVR is established, which means that the 3-D 
FLC can be designed with the help of the SVR learning. Subsequently, for an easy 
implementation, a systematic SVR learning-based 3-D FLC design scheme is 
formulated. In addition, the universal approximation capability of the proposed 
3-D FLC is presented. Finally, the control of a nonlinear catalytic packed-bed 
reactor is considered as an application to demonstrate the effectiveness of the 
proposed 3-D FLC.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2013.2258356
PMID: 24808600


289. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2006 Mar;17(2):526-9. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2006.871723.

On the new method for the control of discrete nonlinear dynamic systems using 
neural networks.

Deng H, Li HX.

Comment on
    IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2004 Mar;15(2):408-16. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2004.824423.

This correspondence points out an incorrect statement in Adetona et al, 2000, 
and Adetona et al., 2004, about the application of the proposed control law to 
nonminimum phase systems. A counterexample shows the limitations of the control 
law and, furthermore, its control capability to nonminimum phase systems is 
explained.

DOI: 10.1109/TNN.2006.871723
PMID: 16566480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2016 Feb;27(2):388-401. doi: 
10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2442437. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Recurrent-Neural-Network-Based Multivariable Adaptive Control for a Class of 
Nonlinear Dynamic Systems With Time-Varying Delay.

Hwang CL, Jan C.

At the beginning, an approximate nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA) 
model is employed to represent a class of multivariable nonlinear dynamic 
systems with time-varying delay. It is known that the disadvantages of robust 
control for the NARMA model are as follows: 1) suitable control parameters for 
larger time delay are more sensitive to achieving desirable performance; 2) it 
only deals with bounded uncertainty; and 3) the nominal NARMA model must be 
learned in advance. Due to the dynamic feature of the NARMA model, a recurrent 
neural network (RNN) is online applied to learn it. However, the system 
performance becomes deteriorated due to the poor learning of the larger 
variation of system vector functions. In this situation, a simple network is 
employed to compensate the upper bound of the residue caused by the linear 
parameterization of the approximation error of RNN. An e -modification learning 
law with a projection for weight matrix is applied to guarantee its boundedness 
without persistent excitation. Under suitable conditions, the semiglobally 
ultimately bounded tracking with the boundedness of estimated weight matrix is 
obtained by the proposed RNN-based multivariable adaptive control. Finally, 
simulations are presented to verify the effectiveness and robustness of the 
proposed control.

DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2442437
PMID: 26126287


291. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 2000;11(1):102-12. doi: 10.1109/72.822514.

A new method for the control of discrete nonlinear dynamic systems using neural 
networks.

Adetona O(1), Garcia E, Keel LH.

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Information Systems, Tennessee State University, 
Nashville, TN 37203-3401, USA.

A new controller design method for nonaffine nonlinear dynamic systems is 
presented in this paper. An identified neural network model of the nonlinear 
plant is used in the proposed method. The method is based on a new control law 
that is developed for any discrete deterministic time-invariant nonlinear 
dynamic system in a subregion Phi(x) of an asymptotically stable equilibrium 
point of the plant. The performance of the control law is not necessarily 
dependent on the distance between the current state of the plant and the 
equilibrium state if the nonlinear dynamic system satisfies some mild 
requirements in Phi(x). The control law is simple to implement and is based on a 
novel linearization of the input-output model of the plant at each instant in 
time. It can be used to control both minimum phase and nonminimum phase 
nonaffine nonlinear plants. Extensive empirical studies have confirmed that the 
control law can be used to control a relatively general class of highly 
nonlinear multiinput-multioutput (MIMO) plants.

DOI: 10.1109/72.822514
PMID: 18249743


292. IEEE Trans Cybern. 2013 Dec;43(6):1755-66. doi: 10.1109/TSMCB.2012.2229389.

Nonsynchronized robust filtering design for continuous-time T–S fuzzy affine 
dynamic systems based on piecewise Lyapunov functions.

Qiu J, Tian H, Lu Q, Gao H.

This paper investigates the problem of robust H(∞) state estimation for a class 
of continuous-time nonlinear systems via Takagi-Sugeno (T-S) fuzzy affine 
dynamic models. Attention is focused on the analysis and design of an admissible 
full-order filter such that the resulting filtering error system is 
asymptotically stable with a guaranteed H(∞) disturbance attenuation level. It 
is assumed that the plant premise variables, which are often the state variables 
or their functions, are not measurable so that the filter implementation with 
state-space partition may not be synchronous with the state trajectories of the 
plant. Based on piecewise quadratic Lyapunov functions combined with S-procedure 
and some matrix inequality linearization techniques, some new results are 
presented for the filtering design of the underlying continuous-time T-S fuzzy 
affine systems. Illustrative examples are given to validate the effectiveness 
and application of the proposed design approaches.

DOI: 10.1109/TSMCB.2012.2229389
PMID: 23757572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Adv Orthop. 2013;2013:432520. doi: 10.1155/2013/432520. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Posterior transpedicular dynamic systems in the treatment of chronic lumbar 
instability.

Ozer AF(1), Goel VK, Alanay A, Sasani M, Oktenoglu T, Erbulut D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Koc University Medical School, Sariyer, 34450 
Istanbul, Turkey.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/432520
PMCID: PMC3749553
PMID: 23991338


294. J Fluids Struct. 2009 Jul 1;25(5):936-953. doi: 
10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2009.02.002.

Coupled Flow-Structure-Biochemistry Simulations of Dynamic Systems of Blood 
Cells Using an Adaptive Surface Tracking Method.

Hoskins MH(1), Kunz RF, Bistline JE, Dong C.

Author information:
(1)The Pennsylvania State University, Applied Research Laboratory, PO Box 30, 
State College, PA 16804.

A method for the computation of low Reynolds number dynamic blood cell systems 
is presented. The specific system of interest here is interaction between cancer 
cells and white blood cells in an experimental flow system. Fluid dynamics, 
structural mechanics, six-degree-of freedom motion control and surface 
biochemistry analysis components are coupled in the context of adaptive 
octree-based grid generation. Analytical and numerical verification of the 
quasi-steady assumption for the fluid mechanics is presented. The capabilities 
of the technique are demonstrated by presenting several three-dimensional cell 
system simulations, including the collision/interaction between a cancer cell 
and an endothelium adherent polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) cell in a shear 
flow.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2009.02.002
PMCID: PMC2765665
PMID: 20160939


295. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2004 Feb;34(1):283-92. doi: 
10.1109/tsmcb.2003.811500.

Hinfinity controller design of fuzzy dynamic systems based on piecewise Lyapunov 
functions.

Feng G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Manufacturing Engineering and Engineering Management, City 
University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. megfeng@cityu.edu.hk

This paper presents a controller design method for fuzzy dynamic systems based 
on a piecewise smooth Lyapunov function. The basic idea of the proposed approach 
is to construct controllers for the fuzzy dynamic systems in such a way that a 
piecewise continuous Lyapunov function can be used to establish the global 
stability with Hinfinity performance of the resulting closed loop fuzzy control 
systems. It is shown that the control law can be obtained by solving a set of 
Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMI) that is numerically feasible with commercially 
available software. An example is given to illustrate the application of the 
proposed method.

DOI: 10.1109/tsmcb.2003.811500
PMID: 15369071


296. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2000;30(2):351-7. doi: 10.1109/3477.836383.

A two-level hybrid evolutionary algorithm for modeling one-dimensional dynamic 
systems by higher-order ODE models.

Cao HQ(1), Kang LS, Guo T, Chen YP, de Garis H.

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab. of Software Eng., Wuhan Univ.

This paper presents a new algorithm for modeling one-dimensional (1-D) dynamic 
systems by higher-order ordinary differential equation (HODE) models instead of 
the ARMA models as used in traditional time series analysis. A two-level hybrid 
evolutionary modeling algorithm (THEMA) is used to approach the modeling problem 
of HODE's for dynamic systems. The main idea of this modeling algorithm is to 
embed a genetic algorithm (GA) into genetic programming (GP), where GP is 
employed to optimize the structure of a model (the upper level), while a GA is 
employed to optimize the parameters of the model (the lower level). In the GA, 
we use a novel crossover operator based on a nonconvex linear combination of 
multiple parents which works efficiently and quickly in parameter optimization 
tasks. Two practical examples of time series are used to demonstrate the THEMA's 
effectiveness and advantages.

DOI: 10.1109/3477.836383
PMID: 18244761


297. Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2008 Jun;42(2):219-23. doi: 10.1007/s12124-008-9063-x. 
Epub 2008 May 14.

Commentary: Are there good reasons to adopt dynamic systems approaches for 
explaining deductive reasoning?

Leitão S(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil. 
selma_leitao2001@yahoo.com

Comment on
    Integr Psychol Behav Sci. 2008 Jun;42(2):212-8. doi: 
10.1007/s12124-007-9047-2.

The focus of this commentary is twofold. First, I examine Faiciuc's attempts to 
counter symbolic computationalism as a major theoretical framework for the study 
of deductive reasoning. Second, I wish to see how far the author goes in her 
defense of Dynamic Systems Approaches (DSAs) as a more promising framework for 
explaining logical reasoning. When reading her work, I posed two versions of the 
same for/against question to myself: How strong is the case against symbolic 
computationalism? And, on the basis of the author's argumentation, would one 
feel justified in adopting DSAs instead? I examine each question in turn, and 
come to similar conclusions. The article by Faiciuc tackles issues of relevance 
to any serious effort toward reflecting on the two perspectives being compared. 
Unfortunately, however, references to studies supporting her claims are rather 
thin. A better-informed answer to the question raised in the title of the 
article is still to be given.

DOI: 10.1007/s12124-008-9063-x
PMID: 18478309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2009 Oct;80(4 Pt 2):046207. doi: 
10.1103/PhysRevE.80.046207. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Using the minimum description length principle for global reconstruction of 
dynamic systems from noisy time series.

Molkov YI(1), Mukhin DN, Loskutov EM, Feigin AM, Fidelin GA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Nizhny Novgorod, 
Russia.

An alternative approach to determining embedding dimension when reconstructing 
dynamic systems from a noisy time series is proposed. The available techniques 
of determining embedding dimension (the false nearest-neighbor method, 
calculation of the correlation integral, and others) are known [H. D. I. 
Abarbanel, (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997)] to be inefficient, even at a low 
noise level. The proposed approach is based on constructing a global model in 
the form of an artificial neural network. The required amount of neurons and the 
embedding dimension are chosen so that the description length should be minimal. 
The considered approach is shown to be appreciably less sensitive to the level 
and origin of noise, which makes it also a useful tool for determining embedding 
dimension when constructing stochastic models.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.80.046207
PMID: 19905415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2000;30(2):344-51. doi: 
10.1109/3477.836382.

Model-based recurrent neural network for modeling nonlinear dynamic systems.

Gan C(1), Danai K.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Mech. & Ind. Eng., Massachusetts Univ., Amherst, MA.

A model-based recurrent neural network (MBRNN) is introduced for modeling 
dynamic systems. This network has a fixed structure that is defined according to 
the linearized state-space model of the plant. Therefore, the MBRNN has the 
ability to incorporate the analytical knowledge of the plant in its formulation. 
With its original topology intact, the MBRNN can then be trained to represent 
the plant nonlinearities through modifying its nodes' activation functions, 
which consist of contours of Gaussian radial basis functions (RBFs). Training in 
MBRNN involves adjusting the weights of the RBF's so as to modify the contours 
representing the activation functions. The performance of the MBRNN is 
demonstrated via several examples. The results indicate that it requires much 
shorter training than needed by ordinary recurrent networks. This efficiency in 
training is attributed to the MBRNN's fixed topology which is independent of 
training.

DOI: 10.1109/3477.836382
PMID: 18244760


300. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2000;30(6):865-77. doi: 
10.1109/3477.891148.

A discrete-time multivariable neuro-adaptive control for nonlinear unknown 
dynamic systems.

Hwang CL(1), Lin CH.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Mech. Eng., Tatung Univ., Taipei, Taiwan.

First, we assume that the controlled systems contain a nonlinear matrix gain 
before a linear discrete-time multivariable dynamic system. Then, a forward 
control based on a nominal system is employed to cancel the system nonlinear 
matrix gain and track the desired trajectory. A novel recurrent-neural-network 
(RNN) with a compensation of upper bound of its residue is applied to model the 
remained uncertainties in a compact subset /spl Omega/. The linearly 
parameterized connection weight for the function approximation error of the 
proposed network is also derived. An e-modification updating law with projection 
for weight matrix is employed to guarantee its boundedness and the stability of 
network without the requirement of persistent excitation. Then a discrete-time 
multivariable neuro-adaptive variable structure control is designed to improve 
the system performances. The semi-global (i.e., for a compact subset /spl 
Omega/) stability of the overall system is then verified by the Lyapunov 
stability theory. Finally, simulations are given to demonstrate the usefulness 
of the proposed controller.

DOI: 10.1109/3477.891148
PMID: 18252417


301. Biofizika. 2008 Mar-Apr;53(2):351-8.

[Origination of Pareto distribution in complex dynamic systems].

[Article in Russian]

Chernavskiĭ DS, Nikitin AP, Chernavskaia OD.

The Pareto distribution, whose probability density function can be approximated 
at sufficiently great chi as rho(chi) - chi(-alpha), where alpha > or = 2, is of 
crucial importance from both the theoretical and practical point of view. The 
main reason is its qualitative distinction from the normal (Gaussian) 
distribution. Namely, the probability of high deviations appears to be 
significantly higher. The conception of the universal applicability of the Gauss 
law remains to be widely distributed despite the lack of objective confirmation 
of this notion in a variety of application areas. The origin of the Pareto 
distribution in dynamic systems located in the gaussian noise field is 
considered. A simple one-dimensional model is discussed where the system 
response in a rather wide interval of the variable can be quite precisely 
approximated by this distribution.

PMID: 18543778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Sensors (Basel). 2026 Jan 6;26(2):354. doi: 10.3390/s26020354.

Investigation of the Adaptivity Degree of State Variables in Linear Models of 
Dynamic Systems.

Selezneva M(1), Neusypin K(1), Surkova A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information and Control Systems (IU1), Bauman Moscow State 
Technical University, Moscow 105005, Russia.

This study investigates the concept of the adaptability degree of state 
variables in mathematical models used in estimation algorithms. Two numerical 
criteria are proposed for calculating the adaptability degree of state variables 
in linear models. Qualitative characteristics of the adaptability of inertial 
navigation system errors are studied under conditions of varying sampling 
periods and flight altitudes of an atmospheric aircraft. The developed methods 
allow for the creation of models for estimation algorithms with desired 
adaptability properties.

DOI: 10.3390/s26020354
PMCID: PMC12845738
PMID: 41600150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


303. Gig Sanit. 2003 Jul-Aug;(4):75-7.

[Mathematical simulation of dynamic systems used in the study of the impact of 
environmental air pollution on morbidity in children].

[Article in Russian]

Matorova NI, Efimova NV, Baturin VA.

PMID: 12934299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
